Ecology, 89(9), 2008, pp. 2493–2505
Ó 2008 by the Ecological Society of America

BIOMASS RATHER THAN GROWTH RATE DETERMINES VARIATION
IN NET PRIMARY PRODUCTION BY GIANT KELP
DANIEL C. REED,1,3 ANDREW RASSWEILER,2 AND KATIE K. ARKEMA2
1
Marine Science Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93111 USA
Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Marine Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93111 USA

2

Abstract. Net primary production (NPP) is inﬂuenced by disturbance-driven ﬂuctuations
in foliar standing crop (FSC) and resource-driven ﬂuctuations in rates of recruitment and
growth, yet most studies of NPP have focused primarily on factors inﬂuencing growth. We
quantiﬁed NPP, FSC, recruitment, and growth rate for the giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, at
three kelp forests in southern California, USA, over a 54-month period and determined the
relative roles of FSC, recruitment, and growth rate in contributing to variation in annual NPP.
Net primary production averaged between 0.42 and 2.38 kg dry massm2yr1 at the three
sites. The initial FSC present at the beginning of the growth year and the recruitment of new
plants during the year explained 63% and 21% of the interannual variation observed in NPP,
respectively. The previous year’s NPP and disturbance from waves collectively accounted for
80% of the interannual variation in initial FSC. No correlation was found between annual
growth rate (i.e., the amount of new kelp mass produced per unit of existing kelp mass) and
annual NPP (i.e., the amount of new kelp mass produced per unit area of ocean bottom),
largely because annual growth rate was consistent compared to initial FSC and recruitment,
which ﬂuctuated greatly among years and sites. Although growth rate was a poor predictor of
variation in annual NPP, it was principally responsible for the high mean values observed for
NPP by Macrocystis. These high mean values reﬂected rapid growth (average of ;2% per day)
of a relatively small standing crop (maximum annual mean ¼ 444 g dry mass/m2) that replaced
itself approximately seven times per year. Disturbance-driven variability in FSC may be
generally important in explaining variation in NPP, yet it is rarely examined because cycles of
disturbance and recovery occur over timescales of decades or more in many systems.
Considerable insight into how variation in FSC drives variation in NPP may be gained by
studying systems such as giant kelp forests that are characterized by frequent disturbance and
rapid rates of growth and recruitment.
Key words: biomass; disturbance; giant kelp; growth; Macrocystis pyrifera; net primary production;
nutrients; recruitment; resource supply; standing crop.

INTRODUCTION
Primary production by photosynthetic organisms
provides the energetic and material basis for the vast
majority of life on earth (Lieth and Whittaker 1975).
Most ecological studies of primary production have
focused on ‘‘net primary production’’ (NPP), which is
that portion of gross primary production from photosynthesis that remains after plant respiration. Net
primary production may represent different processes
depending upon the methods used to measure it, but in
most cases it signiﬁes the dry mass of plant matter (or
plant carbon) produced per unit area of the earth’s
surface per unit time (Reichle et al. 1975, Webb et al.
1983, Fahey and Knapp 2007). It is the product of the
density of actively growing plant mass (hereafter foliar
standing crop [FSC]) and its rate of increase due to
growth and recruitment. Foliar standing crop is
Manuscript received 6 July 2007; revised 19 November 2007;
accepted 27 November 2007. Corresponding Editor: D. R.
Schiel.
3 E-mail: reed@lifesci.ucsb.edu

determined by morphological properties of the vegetation (e.g., plant size, meristem density) and the
proportion of habitat area that it occupies, whereas
rates of growth and recruitment are functions of the
intrinsic physiological properties and life-history characteristics of the component species and their responses
to extrinsic environmental conditions (e.g., resource
availability, temperature).
To date, most research aimed at identifying sources of
interannual variation in NPP has focused on environmental conditions that affect the rate of growth.
Temporal and spatial variation in NPP in many systems
has been causally linked to meteorological variables that
inﬂuence the availability of water, nutrients, and light,
which frequently limit plant growth (Brylinsky and
Mann 1973, Runyon et al. 1994, Jobbagy and Sala 2000,
Knapp and Smith 2001). Disturbance may also affect
plant growth (and hence NPP) by altering resource
availability (Sprugel 1985, McNaughton et al. 1989,
Hobbs and Mooney 1995, Knapp et al. 1998).
In addition to its effects on growth rate, disturbance
may dramatically alter the landscape and cause large

2493

2494

DANIEL C. REED ET AL.

reductions in the standing crop of primary producers
(Sprugel and Bormann 1981, Dayton and Tegner 1989).
However, the contribution of disturbance to temporal
variation in NPP via the reduction in FSC has rarely
been investigated. Such effects are likely to be most
dramatic when NPP is examined over timescales that are
long enough to capture multiple cycles of disturbance
and recovery. Few published data sets on NPP are long
enough to capture these cycles, as the return times for
large disturbances are relatively long (e.g., on order of
decades in the case of most wildﬁres, hurricanes,
mudslides, and outbreaks of disease or grazing; Sousa
1984, Pickett and White 1985). Consequently, ecosystem
modeling has been the primary means for investigating
how disturbance affects vegetation dynamics to inﬂuence variability in NPP (Chen et al. 2000, Li et al. 2003).
Submarine forests of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera)
offer a promising system for ﬁeld-based investigations of
the relative importance of vegetation dynamics and
growth rate to interannual variation in NPP. Not only
are giant kelp forests believed to be one of the most
productive systems on earth (Mann 2000), but frequent
disturbance from a variety of sources causes substantial
temporal and spatial variation in the standing crop of
giant kelp at both local and regional scales (Graham
et al. 1997, Dayton et al. 1999, Edwards 2004).
Moreover, giant kelp forests are a tractable system to
study because rapid growth coupled with a high
propensity for recruitment following disturbance allows
most Macrocystis populations to recover from disturbance within a couple of years (Reed et al. 2006).
In contrast to the wealth of information on patterns
and causes of Macrocystis population dynamics, surprisingly little is known about temporal and spatial
variation in Macrocystis growth and NPP and the
factors that control them. Our knowledge of the
environmental processes that control growth in Macrocystis is derived largely from short-term studies of small
juvenile plants (Dean and Jacobsen 1984) and of
individual blades and stipes of large mature plants
(van Tussenbroek 1989, Brown et al. 1997, Hepburn and
Hurd 2005). Data from such studies are difﬁcult to
extrapolate to entire populations that have spatially and
temporally variable age and size structures. Similarly,
most empirical studies of primary production in Macrocystis have been relatively short term, of limited spatial
scale, and difﬁcult to compare either because they used
methods that measured different processes or because
they expressed NPP in different metrics (reviewed in
Coon 1982, North 1994). Such eclectic information has
limited value when attempting to understand and
predict patterns and causes of spatial and temporal
variation in the growth and production of giant kelp
forests.
In this study we documented patterns of temporal
variation in NPP of Macrocystis at three kelp forests in
southern California over 4.5 years. We measured the
vital rates underlying NPP (i.e., growth, biomass loss,

Ecology, Vol. 89, No. 9

and recruitment) and the extent to which variation in
them was inﬂuenced by abiotic factors, such as ocean
swell height (the primary source of physical disturbance), ocean temperature (a surrogate for nitrate,
which is the nutrient thought to most frequently limit
growth), and biological processes such as density
dependence (inferred from FSC). We used these data
to determine the relative contributions of disturbancedriven ﬂuctuations in FSC and resource-driven ﬂuctuations in rates of recruitment and growth to variation in
annual NPP of giant kelp.
SPECIES DESCRIPTION AND STUDY SITE CHARACTERISTICS
The giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, is the world’s
largest alga. An individual (hereafter referred to as a
plant) consists of a bundle of fronds (often totaling more
than 100) anchored by a common holdfast. Each frond
consists of a cylindrical rope-like stipe along which
many leaf-like blades are attached via small gas bladders
that serve to buoy the frond. Unlike land plants, kelp
has no belowground parts and nutrient uptake and
photosynthesis occur throughout the organism. New
fronds originate in the basal foliage just above the
holdfast, grow vertically in the water column, and form
a dense canopy at the sea surface. They routinely attain
lengths over 20 m, and the stipes commonly elongate at
rates of 50 cm/d, which is among the fastest elongation
rates on record for any terrestrial or marine autotroph
(Clendenning 1971). The average life span of a frond in
southern California is three to ﬁve months, and adult
plants live an average of two to three years (North 1994;
D. C. Reed, A. Rassweiler, and K. K. Arkema,
unpublished data).
Data for this study were collected at three kelp forests
located off the coast of Santa Barbara, California, USA:
Mohawk Reef (34823 0 4000 N, 119843 0 4800 W), Arroyo
Burro (34824 0 00 00 N, 119844 0 40 00 W), and Arroyo
Quemado (34828 0 0800 N, 120807 0 1700 W). These forests
occur on low-relief bedrock reefs whose dimensions
range from ;300 m (Mohawk and Arroyo Burro) to
1500 m (Arroyo Quemado) in length (alongshore
dimension) and ;200 m to 300 m in width (cross-shore
dimension). All data on kelp were collected in permanent plots located in the middle of each forest at 6–8 m
depth using scuba.
METHODS
Net primary production calculations
We investigated spatial and temporal variation in
NPP of Macrocystis pyrifera using ﬁeld measurements
and a simple model of kelp dynamics, which assumed
that, within a sampling period, biomass was produced
and lost at rates proportional to existing FSC. Using this
model we calculated the NPP and speciﬁc growth rate
(i.e., rate at which new kelp tissue is produced per unit of
existing kelp tissue) for each month that accounted for
the observed change in FSC given independently
measured loss rates. We calculated mean daily NPP

September 2008

NET PRIMARY PRODUCTION BY GIANT KELP

and mean daily speciﬁc growth rate of giant kelp at the
three study sites for each season (i.e., winter, spring,
summer, and autumn as deﬁned by the winter solstice,
spring equinox, summer solstice, and autumnal equinox)
from spring 2002 through autumn 2006 (see Rassweiler
et al., in press, for detailed description of the methods).
Net primary production and speciﬁc growth were
expressed as daily rates to account for slight variations
in the length of the sampling intervals.
At each site we sampled M. pyrifera plants in a
permanent plot that was either 200 m2 (Arroyo
Quemado and Mohawk) or 480 m2 (Arroyo Burro) in
area. Our estimates of the FSC of giant kelp at the
beginning and end of each monthly sampling interval
were based on measurements taken of all individuals .1
m tall in each plot. We characterized each individual
that we measured using three distinct plant sections: (1)
the ‘‘subsurface’’ section consisted of fronds that did not
reach the surface, (2) the ‘‘water column’’ section was the
subsurface portion of fronds that reached the surface,
and (3) the ‘‘canopy’’ section was the portion of the
fronds at the sea surface. For each plant within the
permanent plots we counted the number of fronds 1 m
above the holdfast (N1m), and the number of fronds at
the surface (Nsrfc), and we measured the water depth at
the top of the holdfast (D) and the length of the canopy
portion of the longest frond (MAX). We use these
measurements to calculate the length of each plant
section, according to the following equations:
subsurface length ¼ ðN1m  Nsrfc Þ½1 þ 0:5ðD  1Þ

ð1Þ

water column length ¼ ðNsrfc ÞðDÞ

ð2Þ

canopy length ¼ ðNsrfc Þð0:5MAXÞ:

ð3Þ

We tested the accuracy of Eqs. 1, 2, and 3 in
estimating the total frond length by comparing estimates
of length obtained using these equations to actual
lengths. To do this we collected 55 plants between June
2002 and June 2003 from our three study sites. In the
laboratory we measured the length of all fronds on each
plant and compared the sum of these lengths to the total
frond length obtained by summing the values given by
Eqs. 1, 2, and 3. Total frond length estimated using Eqs.
1, 2, and 3 was an excellent predictor of actual total
frond length (r2 ¼ 0.993, slope ¼ 1.02).
Relationships generated from length and mass measurements of the 55 adult M. pyrifera collected from our
study sites were used to convert the total length of each
of the three plant sections measured in the permanent
plots to total wet mass. Holdfasts and basal sporophylls
were not included in measurements of total wet mass.
The ratio of frond wet mass (in kilograms) to frond
length (in meters) was 0.117 for the subsurface section,
0.105 for the water column section, and 0.259 for the
canopy section. The wet mass of each plant was
converted to dry mass based on the ratio of wet/dry

2495

mass of blades collected from 10–15 plants at each site
during each survey to obtain an estimate of FSC in units
of kelp dry mass. A 5-cm2 disk was taken from the
central portion of each blade and used to form a
composite sample that was dried and analyzed using an
elemental analyzer to estimate the percentage of carbon
and percentage of nitrogen of the FSC for each site
every month. Values were adjusted to account for
differences in the carbon and nitrogen content of stipes
and blades (Rassweiler et al., in press).
During each monthly sampling interval we also
calculated instantaneous loss rates for entire plants
and for fronds on surviving plants using 10–15 tagged
plants at each site. Loss rates of plants were based on the
fraction of tagged plants that survived from one
sampling date to the next. New plants were tagged to
replace plants that were lost during the previous
sampling interval to maintain a sample size of 10–15
plants. Loss rates of fronds were based on the fraction of
tagged fronds on tagged plants that survived during
each sampling interval. Estimating losses resulting from
the removal of parts of a frond and from the excretion of
dissolved substances was beyond the scope of this study.
Thus we estimated the total instantaneous loss rate l as
the sum of the loss rates of plants and fronds.
Using our estimates of the initial and ﬁnal FSC (S0,
St) and loss rate (l) for each monthly sampling interval
we calculated the mean growth rate (g) of M. pyrifera as
 
1
St
þl
ð4Þ
g ¼ ln
T
S0
where T is the number of days in the sampling interval.
This calculation was based on an exponential growth
model, but using a linear or logistic growth model to
calculate NPP produced nearly identical results (Rassweiler et al., in press). This exponential model implies
that NPP at any moment is the product of g and S. We
assumed that growth was constant over the monthly
sampling interval and expressed S at any time t as a
function of initial FSC, growth rate, and loss rate (St ¼
S0e(gl )t ). Daily NPP for each monthly sampling interval
was obtained by integrating instantaneous NPP over the
interval and dividing by T:
Z T
gSt dt:
ð5Þ
NPP ¼
0

Mean daily NPP and mean daily growth rate of M.
pyrifera for each season were calculated as the mean
NPP and mean growth rate for all days in the season.
Each of the variables included in our calculations of
growth rate and NPP has an error associated with its
measurement. We accounted for observer error, sampling error, and regression error for each variable in our
calculations of NPP and growth rate using a Monte
Carlo approach that drew randomly from the distributions of each of the component variables (Harmon et al.
2007). These distributions were derived from actual data

2496

DANIEL C. REED ET AL.

and from independent estimates of the error associated
with each variable. The standard error for each value of
NPP and growth rate was based on values observed in
1000 Monte Carlo simulations. We used this same
approach to estimate errors associated with our
measurements of FSC and loss rate.
Environmental data
We used seawater temperature as a surrogate for the
ambient concentration of nitrate to investigate the
relationship between nutrient availability and speciﬁc
growth rate in giant kelp. Temperature and nitrate are
inversely correlated at our sites and at other locals in
southern California (Jackson 1977, Zimmerman and
Kremer 1984, McPhee-Shaw et al. 2007). We measured
temperature every 10 min using loggers (Stowaway
Onset tidbits, accuracy 60.28C; Onset Computer,
Bourne, Massachusetts, USA) fastened to the bottom
at each site. The ambient concentration of dissolved
inorganic nitrogen (DIN ¼ nitrate þ nitrite) was
calculated from temperature using a relationship reported in McPhee-Shaw et al. (2007) that was based on 3137
data points collected at Arroyo Quemado (DIN ¼
0.00628747Temp4 þ 0.32811Temp3  5.7165Temp2 þ
33.833Temp  9.7322 for Temp , 15.58C, with DIN ¼
0.22 for Temp . 15.58C; total error 6 0.79 lmol/L).
Dissolved inorganic nitrogen values were averaged to
obtain a mean DIN concentration for each season.
We investigated the relationship between wave height
and loss rates of Macrocystis plants and fronds (as a
fraction of FSC) using wave data from the Goleta Point
Buoy (Coastal Data Information Program station 107,
data available online)4 located 11 km offshore of our
study sites in the Santa Barbara Channel (34820 0 0000 N,
119848 0 1300 W). We used the maximum value of the
signiﬁcant wave height (HS) recorded during each
monthly sampling interval to examine the relationship
between wave disturbance and monthly estimates of the
two different types of biomass loss (i.e., fronds and
plants). Signiﬁcant wave height is commonly used to
describe wave height and represents the mean of the
largest one-third of the waves recorded during a 30-min
sampling period.
Statistical analyses
We examined whether annual NPP was related to the
FSC at the start of the growth year (hereafter initial
FSC), the density of plants that recruit during the year,
and the annual rate of kelp growth. We considered the
start of the growth year to be the winter solstice since
this is the time of year when FSC is most commonly at
or near its minimum (see Results, Fig. 1). The density of
recruits for each month was estimated as the increase in
plant density from the previous month. Recruitment was
assumed to be zero in months when plant density did not
4 hhttp://cdip.ucsd.edui

Ecology, Vol. 89, No. 9

increase. Recruitment can be greatly underestimated
using this approach if the appearance of new plants
largely coincides with the loss of established plants. Our
independent estimates of plant loss indicate that this was
not the case as the loss rate of established plants was
typically lowest during months that showed the greatest
increase in plant density (see Results, Fig. 2 vs. Fig. 3a).
Annual growth and annual NPP were calculated as the
sum of daily growth or daily NPP over the growth year.
Single regressions were done to obtain the best
independent estimates of the contributions of initial
FSC, annual recruitment, and annual growth to
variation in annual NPP using annual estimates from
four years at each of the three sites. Stepwise multiple
regression was used to estimate the relative contribution
of each of the independent variables to variation in
annual NPP. We tested for collinearity among the
independent variables by evaluating tolerance variables
(Quinn and Keough 2002) and condition indices (Belsley
et al. 1980) and found that it was not signiﬁcant.
RESULTS
Foliar standing crop
The FSC of giant kelp peaked at all three sites during
the ﬁrst three months of the 54-mo study, with
maximum values of 1.28, 1.12, and 1.66 kg dry mass/m2
at Arroyo Burro, Arroyo Quemado, and Mohawk,
respectively (Fig. 1). Maximum plant densities during
this period averaged 0.3 plants/m2 at Arroyo Burro and
0.61 plants/m2 at Arroyo Quemado and Mohawk. These
peaks were followed by abrupt declines at all three sites
beginning in November 2002. The initiation of this
decline coincided with a period of large oceanic swells
that led to a .90% reduction in FSC over the ensuing
three months (November 2002 to January 2003). Kelp
dynamics behaved differently at the three sites following
this decline. Most notable was the lack of recovery by
Macrocystis at Arroyo Burro where FSC rarely
increased above 0.15 kg dry mass/m2 during the next
four years. The sustained reduction in FSC at Arroyo
Burro was due to a persistent decrease in the availability
of reef habitat needed for kelp recruitment and growth.
This decrease in reef habitat resulted from movement of
sand during the November 2002 swells that buried
.80% of the rocky habitat for the remainder of the
study (D. C. Reed, A. Rassweiler, and K. K. Arkema,
unpublished data). In contrast to Arroyo Burro, the reefs
at Arroyo Quemado and Mohawk were not inundated
by sand and the kelp forests at these sites recovered
relatively quickly from the large swells of 2002 (Fig. 1).
Nevertheless, the FSC at these sites never reached the
high levels observed at the start of the study, in part
because wave-induced disturbance occurred during each
winter of the study. Substantial variability in giant kelp
FSC was observed both within and among years at these
two sites, with peaks generally occurring in late summer
to autumn (August to November) and minima in winter
(January to March). The FSC averaged 0.444 6 0.036

September 2008

NET PRIMARY PRODUCTION BY GIANT KELP

2497

FIG. 1. Monthly estimates (6SE) of the foliar standing crop (FSC) of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) at the three study sites
located off the coast of Santa Barbara, California, USA. Horizontal dashed lines represent the time-averaged means for each site.

and 0.408 6 0.051 kg dry mass/m2 (0.126 6 0.011 and
0.115 6 0.014 kg C/m2; mean 6 SE) at Arroyo
Quemado and Mohawk, respectively, over the 54-month
study.
Decreases in FSC reﬂected losses of entire plants and
portions of plants (i.e., fronds) due to senescence and
dislodgement. Frond loss occurred continuously
throughout the year, though the rate of frond loss
varied as much as ﬁvefold within any given year (Fig. 2).
Highest loss rates were observed in the winter, with
frond loss during some months averaging as much as 4%
of the FSC per day. Unlike fronds, the loss of entire
plants was relatively episodic, with most tagged plants
disappearing in winter and early spring and little to no
plant loss occurring in summer. Losses at each of the
three sites were related to oceanic swells; the maximum
signiﬁcant wave height observed during a given sampling interval explained a signiﬁcant amount of the
variation in the loss rates of both fronds and plants

during that sampling interval (Fig. 2). The lone
exception to this pattern was at Arroyo Burro, where
frond loss varied independently of wave height. Rates of
frond loss and plant loss at each site were unrelated to
the densities of fronds and plants at the site prior to the
loss (r2 , 0.04 and P . 0.17 for both frond loss and
plant loss at all three sites). While the loss rates of fronds
and plants varied among sites during any given month,
the 54-month means were similar across the three sites,
averaging ;1.3% and 0.5% of the FSC per day, for
fronds and plants, respectively (Fig. 2).
Recruitment
The recruitment of new plants to a size of at least 1 m
tall occurred primarily in the summer (June through
September; Fig. 3a). Recruitment rates differed greatly
among sites and years. Relatively little recruitment was
observed at Arroyo Burro during the study, whereas
substantial recruitment was observed in four of the ﬁve

2498

DANIEL C. REED ET AL.

Ecology, Vol. 89, No. 9

FIG. 2. Instantaneous loss rates for giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) fronds (top row) and plants (bottom row) and maximum
signiﬁcant wave height (max HS) vs. time. Labels on the far right and far left y-axes apply to all panels within a row. Horizontal
dotted lines represent the time-averaged means of frond and plant loss rates. Statistics are from the linear regressions examining the
relationship between instantaneous loss rate (fronds or plants) during a sample period and the max HS during the sample period.

summers at Mohawk (2002 being the exception) and in
two summers (2004 and 2006) at Arroyo Quemado.
Pulses in recruitment (i.e., periods when the density of
recruits . 0.4 recruits/m2) occurred only when the initial
FSC was ,0.4 kg dry mass/m2 (Fig. 3b), and peaks in
recruitment were always followed by increases in FSC
(Fig. 3a vs. Fig. 1).
Growth
Growth rates of giant kelp on a dry-mass basis
averaged ;2% of the FSC per day at each of the three
sites over the period of study (Fig. 4). At this rate the
FSC had the potential to double every 34 d, assuming no
biomass loss. Although mean growth was similar among
the sites, patterns of temporal variation in growth
differed among them. Seasonal variation in growth was
most evident at Arroyo Quemado, where it cycled
between high rates in winter and spring and low rates in
summer and fall (Fig. 4b). This seasonal pattern in
growth rate varied inconsistently among years at
Mohawk, where it showed a winter/spring peak in
2003 and 2005 and a spring/summer peak in 2004 and
2006 (Fig. 4c). In contrast to Arroyo Quemado and
Mohawk, growth rates at Arroyo Burro ﬂuctuated
sporadically in time with no apparent seasonality
(Fig. 4a). The large spike in growth at Arroyo Burro
observed in summer 2004 occurred at a time when the
low FSC consisted of a relatively high proportion of

small young plants. Growth rates at this site reached a
minimum the following winter (2005), when these young
plants were lost during a large wave event (Fig. 1a).
The highest growth rates were most frequently
observed at times and locations when FSC was relatively
low (i.e., ,0.5 kg dry mass/m2; Fig. 5a). A small
standing crop, however, was not the sole requisite for
rapid growth as slow growth was also frequently
observed at low standing crops. Growth varied with
the size structure of the standing crop as growth rate was
positively related to the proportion of the FSC that
consisted of small, young individuals, suggesting younger plants grew at a faster rate than older plants
(Fig. 5b). Growth rate was positively related to the
concentration of DIN at Arroyo Quemado, where
seasonal trends in growth rate were most apparent
(Fig. 6a). No such relationship was found at either
Arroyo Burro or Mohawk. Moreover, growth rate was
unrelated to the nitrogen content of the standing crop at
all three sites (Fig. 6b). The nitrogen content of the
standing crop followed a power function with DIN at
each of the sites (Fig. 6c), indicating that the acquisition
of nitrogen by kelp was generally dependent upon the
concentration of nitrate in seawater.
Net primary production and turnover
The highest values of NPP were recorded at the
beginning of the study prior to the large swells in

September 2008

NET PRIMARY PRODUCTION BY GIANT KELP

2499

FIG. 3. (a) Spatial and temporal variation in the density of newly recruited giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) .1 m tall. (b)
Relationship between the density of recruits at the end of the sampling interval and foliar standing crop (FSC) at the beginning of
the sampling interval. Data are monthly values for Arroyo Burro (solid circles), Arroyo Quemado (open circles), and Mohawk
(solid triangles).

November 2002 (Fig. 7). The loss of kelp biomass
caused an abrupt decline in NPP at all three sites. Net
primary productivity remained relatively low at Arroyo
Burro, averaging 2.0 g dry massm2 d1 (0.6 g
Cm2d1) over the 54-month study, despite periods of
rapid growth (Fig. 3a). In contrast, NPP varied
sporadically at Arroyo Quemado and Mohawk, with
no apparent seasonality. Overall, NPP was substantially
higher at these two sites, averaging ;7.5 g dry
massm2d1 (2.2 g Cm2d1; Fig. 7b, c). These
relatively high mean values of NPP resulted from
consistently high growth rates (Fig. 4) of a relatively
small amount of kelp biomass (Fig. 1) that turned over
on average 6.8 times per year (as estimated by the ratio
of annual NPP to mean annual FSC). Annual rates of
biomass turnover were similar among sites (mean annual
turnover rate ¼ 7.3, 5.9, and 7.2 for Arroyo Burro,
Arroyo Quemado, and Mohawk, respectively; F2,11 ¼
3.37, P ¼ 0.081) and were largely independent of the
mean annual FSC (F1,11 ¼ 3.60, r2 ¼ 0.265, P ¼ 0.087).

Sources of variation in annual net primary production
On an annual basis NPP averaged 0.42 kg dry
massm2yr1 (0.12 kg Cm2yr1) at Arroyo Burro
and 2.31 and 2.38 kg dry massm2yr1 (0.66 and 0.68
kg Cm2yr1) at Arroyo Quemado and Mohawk,
respectively. Annual NPP was positively related to both
initial FSC (F1,11 ¼ 16.76, r2 ¼ 0.626, P ¼ 0.002) and
annual recruitment (F1,11 ¼ 8.96, r2 ¼ 0.473, P ¼ 0.014).
Surprisingly, no correlation was found between annual
growth and annual NPP (F1,11 ¼ 0.21, r2 ¼ 0.021, P ¼
0.653). Multiple regression analysis revealed that initial
FSC and annual recruitment contributed 62% and 22%
of the interannual variation in NPP, respectively
(Table 1a). The greater inﬂuence of initial FSC and
recruitment compared to growth rate resulted in large
part from differences in the dynamic range of variation
in these variables. Interannual variability in initial FSC
and recruitment (as indicated by the coefﬁcient of
variation among years) was 78.0% and 69.2%, respectively, compared to 19.2% for growth rate.

2500

DANIEL C. REED ET AL.

Ecology, Vol. 89, No. 9

FIG. 4. Estimates (6SE) of the speciﬁc growth rate of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) at the three study sites by season (Sum,
summer; Win, winter). Horizontal dashed lines represent the time-averaged means for each site.

Additional regression analyses revealed a positive
feedback between initial FSC and NPP, as initial FSC
(the primary determinant of NPP) was positively related
to NPP in the previous year (F1,11 ¼ 13.67, r2 ¼ 0.578, P
¼ 0.004) and negatively related to the loss rate of kelp
biomass at the end of the previous year (i.e., autumn;
F1,11 ¼ 5.29, r2 ¼ 0.346, P ¼ 0.044). Collectively, these
two variables accounted for 79.5% of the interannual
variation in initial FSC (Table 1b).
DISCUSSION
One of the most striking results of our study was the
insigniﬁcance of growth rate in explaining variation in
annual NPP. We believe that this was due in part to an
oceanographic climate that was relatively favorable for
kelp growth during our study. Nitrate has been
identiﬁed as the nutrient that most frequently limits
growth of giant kelp in many parts of the world, and
variation in climatic factors that inﬂuence the supply of
nitrate to giant kelp forests is believed to be a leading
cause of variability in kelp growth (Jackson 1977,

Zimmerman and Kremer 1986, van Tussenbroek 1989,
Brown et al. 1997). For instance, in southern California
nitrogen-limited growth in Macrocystis is most pronounced during extended periods of low nutrient
availability, such as those that occur during El Niños
(Gerard 1982, Zimmerman and Robertson 1985).
However, kelp growth rates during more nutrient-rich
conditions can be highly variable, with no clear
correlation to ambient nitrate concentrations or tissue
nitrogen content (Wheeler and North 1981). Our
observations of continuously high nitrogen content in
kelp (generally above 1%; Fig. 6b, c) coupled with our
ﬁnding that growth was unrelated to the concentration
of DIN in seawater at two of our three sites (Fig. 6a)
suggest that growth was rarely nitrogen limited during
our study. The contrasting results between our study
and those done during prolonged conditions of nutrient
stress (Gerard 1982, Zimmerman and Robertson 1985)
lend support to the contention that the importance of
intra-annual variation in nitrogen supply in determining

September 2008

NET PRIMARY PRODUCTION BY GIANT KELP

2501

FIG. 5. The relationship between the speciﬁc growth rate of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) and (a) the foliar standing crop
(FSC) of kelp at the start of each season and (b) the proportion of the standing crop consisting of new recruits (recruit FSC/total
FSC). The regression in (a) remained signiﬁcant (P , 0.0146) when the outlier at Arroyo Burro was excluded from the analysis.
Recruits in (b) were deﬁned as subsurface plants with four or fewer fronds. Data are seasonal means for Arroyo Burro (solid
circles), Arroyo Quemado (open circles), and Mohawk (solid triangles).

kelp growth depends on the state of longer-term
oceanographic conditions (Graham et al. 2007).
The reduction in light due to density-dependent
shading is widely regarded as a critical determinant of
plant growth. Not surprisingly, light limitation is
believed to be a very important constraint on growth
in giant kelp (Jackson 1987), and it may have
contributed to the seasonal variation in growth that
we observed. The inverse relationship that we found
between FSC and growth rate is similar to that detected
by Gerard (1976) for Macrocystis in central California
and suggests light limitation (via density-dependent
shading) as an important factor in determining patterns
of kelp growth. Consistent with this hypothesis is the
seasonal growth pattern (high in winter and spring and
low in summer and autumn) that we recorded at Arroyo
Quemado and to a lesser extent Mohawk, which was
completely out of phase with the seasonal pattern
observed in FSC (i.e., low in winter and spring and
high in summer and autumn). This reduced growth

during seasons of high biomass tends to dampen withinyear variation in NPP.
Light limitation via density-dependent shading cannot
account for the variable growth rates observed at
Arroyo Burro, where FSC remained low for most of
the study. Instead, changes in the age structure of the
population appeared to be the primary source of large
ﬂuctuations in an otherwise relatively constant pattern
of annual growth, as younger kelp plants appeared to
grow faster than older kelp plants. Differences in age
structure may also have accounted for the occasional lag
in growth at Mohawk relative to Arroyo Quemado
(Fig. 4) as the FSC at Mohawk consisted of a greater
proportion of young, fast-growing individuals due to
more frequent recruitment at this site. Changes in age
structure are common following a disturbance and have
been shown to be an important source of interannual
variation in growth and NPP in other systems (Sprugel
and Bormann 1980, Li et al. 2003).

2502

DANIEL C. REED ET AL.

FIG. 6. The relationship between (a) speciﬁc growth rate
and the ambient concentration of dissolved inorganic nitrogen
(DIN) in seawater, (b) speciﬁc growth rate and nitrogen content
of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera), and (c) kelp nitrogen
content and ambient DIN concentration. Data are seasonal
means for Arroyo Burro (solid circles), Arroyo Quemado (open
circles), and Mohawk (solid triangles) for the period June 2002
to December 2006. The regression line in (a) is for Arroyo
Quemado; the regression line in (c) is for all sites combined.

The relatively high values of NPP by Macrocystis
reported here (;2.3 kg dry massm2yr1) are nearly
identical to those found by Gerard (1976) in central
California (assuming a wet mass/dry mass ratio of 10)
and support Mann’s (2000) contention that giant kelp
forests are among the most productive systems in the
world. It is worth noting that our measurements of
Macrocystis NPP underestimate total forest production
because they did not account for the partial loss of kelp
fronds (due to grazing, breakage, senescence) or the loss
of dissolved organic exudates, nor did they account for
production by understory algae and phytoplankton,
which contribute additional sources of primary produc-

Ecology, Vol. 89, No. 9

tion to kelp forests ecosystems. Although growth rate
was a poor predictor of annual variation in Macrocystis
NPP, it is principally responsible for giant kelp’s high
mean rates of NPP, which result from rapid growth of a
relatively small standing crop (usually ,1 kg dry
mass/m2) that turns over an average of approximately
seven times per year.
Our results highlight the importance of viewing net
primary production by a system as a suite of biotic and
abiotic factors interacting with several key attributes of
primary producers. We depict these interactions in a
conceptual model in which the standing crop of primary
producers and their rates of growth and recruitment
combine to determine NPP (Fig. 8). Disturbance acts to
directly reduce the standing crop of primary producers,
whereas the delivery of resources enhances their vital
rates (i.e., growth and recruitment). Disturbances may
also have positive or negative effects on resource supply,
depending of the nature of the disturbance (e.g., ﬁre vs.
grazing) and the type of resource (e.g., light vs.
nutrients). These concepts apply generally to most
systems.
Although many studies have examined one or more
components of our model, few if any have explored
them all simultaneously. By studying giant kelp at
several sites over multiple years we were able to evaluate
the relative strengths of most of the interactions depicted
in Fig. 8 over a relatively broad range of conditions. We
found that periodic wave disturbance led to large
seasonal reductions in kelp standing crop at all three
sites. However, we observed signiﬁcant among-site
differences in standing crop dynamics as the loss of
kelp biomass due to waves was much reduced at Arroyo
Burro following persistent sand inundation (Fig. 1a).
Our observations of reduced rates of recruitment and
growth during seasons with initially high standing crops
(Figs. 3b and 5a) coupled with the weak and inconsistent
relationship between growth and nitrogen (Fig. 6)
support the hypothesis that standing crop negatively
affected recruitment and growth via density-dependent
competition for light (shown by the negative effect of
standing crop on recruitment, growth, and resource
supply in Fig. 8). That increases in FSC always followed
pulses in recruitment is in turn consistent with the
positive effects of recruitment and growth on FSC
depicted in the model. Our ﬁnding that loss rates and
NPP accounted for nearly 80% of the observed annual
variation in FSC at the beginning of the subsequent year
(Table 1b) provides evidence for a positive feedback
between NPP and FSC that was countered by losses in
FSC due to disturbance. Lastly, our ﬁndings are
consistent with the positive interactions between standing crop and NPP and between recruitment and NPP
(Fig. 8), which collectively explained 84% of the
variation in annual NPP of giant kelp at our sites
(Table 1a). Surprisingly, the only interaction in our
conceptual model of NPP that we failed to ﬁnd evidence
for was a positive relationship between growth rate and

September 2008

NET PRIMARY PRODUCTION BY GIANT KELP

2503

FIG. 7. Estimates (6SE) of net primary production (NPP) of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) at the three study sites by season
(Sum, summer; Win, winter). Horizontal dashed lines represent the time-averaged means for each site.

TABLE 1. Results from stepwise multiple regression analyses investigating the relative
contributions of (a) foliar standing crop at the start of the growing season [log(initial FSC)]
and annual recruitment density of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) to variation in annual net
primary production (NPP), and (b) previous year’s NPP and loss rate of kelp biomass in
autumn of the previous year (loss) to initial FSC.
df

R2

F

P

a) Dependent variable: annual NPP
Model
log(initial FSC)
Recruitment
Residual variation

2
1
1
9

0.8418
0.6263
0.2155
0.1582

23.94
21.00
12.26

0.0002
0.0013
0.0067

b) Dependent variable: log(initial FSC)
Model
log(NPP)
Loss
Residual variation

2
1
1
9

0.7951
0.5774
0.2177
0.2049

17.47
19.73
9.56

0.0008
0.0016
0.0129

Source

Notes: Tolerance variables were .0.9, and condition indices were ,10 for each analysis,
indicating no signiﬁcant collinearity among the independent variables in either (a) or (b). Data for
this study were collected at three kelp forests located off the coast of Santa Barbara, California,
USA.

2504

DANIEL C. REED ET AL.

FIG. 8. Conceptual model of the factors inﬂuencing net
primary production.

NPP, which we attribute to the relatively low variability
observed in growth rate relative to that observed for
FSC and recruitment.
The degree to which interannual variability in NPP of
a system arises from disturbance-driven ﬂuctuations in
standing crop (the upper portion of Fig. 8) vs. resourcedriven ﬂuctuations in growth (the lower portion of
Fig. 8) depends on the vital rates of its primary
producers, environmental conditions that inﬂuence rates
of disturbance and the availability of resources, and the
length of time that the system is studied. The tendency to
date has been to focus on resource-driven ﬂuctuations in
growth, perhaps because they are more amenable to
study over the short term. However, the failure to
account for disturbance-driven ﬂuctuations in standing
crop can lead to overestimates of the mean and
underestimates of the variance in NPP, particularly in
systems consisting of relatively long-lived or slowgrowing perennials (Li et al. 2003). Systems such as
giant kelp forests, which are characterized by frequent
disturbance followed by rapid recovery via high rates of
recruitment and growth, have the potential to provide
considerable insight into the multitude of ways that
biotic and abiotic factors interact with the standing crop
and vital rates of primary producers to inﬂuence net
primary production.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank M. Anghera, B. Evans, S. Harrer, B. Mardian, and
C. Nelson, as well as numerous others who spent many hours
underwater in cold, uncomfortable conditions assisting us in
data collection. The manuscript beneﬁted from discussion with
and comments from M. Brzezinski, P. Raimondi, R. Zimmerman, and three anonymous reviewers. This material is based on
support by the National Science Foundation under grant
numbers OCE 9982105 and OCE 0620276.
LITERATURE CITED
Belsley, D. A., E. Kuh, and R. E. Welsch. 1980. Regression
diagnostics: identifying inﬂuential data and sources of
collinearity. John Wiley and Sons, New York, New York,
USA.
Brown, M. T., M. A. Nyman, J. A. Keogh, and N. K. M. Chin.
1997. Seasonal growth of the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera
in New Zealand. Marine Biology 129:417–424.
Brylinsky, M., and K. H. Mann. 1973. An analysis of factors
governing productivity in lakes and reservoirs. Liminology
and Oceanography 18:1–14.
Chen, W., J. Chen, and J. Cihlar. 2000. An integrated terrestrial
ecosystem carbon-budget model based on changes in

Ecology, Vol. 89, No. 9

disturbance, climate, and atmospheric chemistry. Ecological
Modelling 135:55–79.
Clendenning, K. A. 1971. Photosynthesis and general development. Pages 169–190 in W. J. North, editor. The biology of
giant kelp beds (Macrocystis) in California. Beihefte Zur
Nova Hedwigia, Verlag Von J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Coon, D. 1982. Primary productivity of macroalgae in North
Paciﬁc America. Pages 447–454 in O. R. Zaborsky, editor.
CRC Handbook of biosolar resources. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, Florida, USA.
Dayton, P. K., and M. J. Tegner. 1989. Bottoms beneath
troubled waters: benthic impacts of the 1982–1984 El Niño in
the temperate zone. Pages 433–72 in P. W. Glynn, editor.
Global ecological consequences of the 1982–83 El Niño–
Southern Oscillation. Elsevier Oceanography Series Number
52. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Dayton, P. K., M. J. Tegner, P. B. Edwards, and K. L. Riser.
1999. Temporal and spatial scales of kelp demography: the
role of oceanographic climate. Ecological Monographs 69:
219–250.
Dean, T. A., and F. R. Jacobsen. 1984. Growth of juvenile
Macrocystis pyrifera (Laminariales) in relation to environmental factors. Marine Biology 83:301–311.
Edwards, M. S. 2004. Estimating scale-dependency in disturbance impacts: El Niños and giant kelp forests in the
northeast Paciﬁc. Oecologia 138:436–447.
Fahey, T. J., and A. K. Knapp. 2007. Principles and standards
for measuring primary production. Oxford University Press,
New York, New York, USA.
Gerard, V. A. 1976. Some aspects of material dynamics and
energy ﬂow in a kelp forest in Monterey Bay, California.
Dissertation. University of California, Santa Cruz, California, USA.
Gerard, V. A. 1982. Growth and utilization of internal nitrogen
reserves by the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera in a lownitrogen environment. Marine Biology 66:27–35.
Graham, M. H., C. Harrold, S. Lisin, K. Light, J. M.
Watanabe, and M. S. Foster. 1997. Population dynamics of
giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera along a wave exposure
gradient. Marine Ecology Progress Series 148:269–279.
Graham, M. H., J. A. Vasquez, and A. H. Buschmann. 2007.
Global ecology of the giant kelp Macrocystis: from ecotypes
to ecosystems. Oceanography and Marine Biology: An
Annual Review 45:39–88.
Harmon, M. E., D. L. Phillips, J. Battles, A. Rassweiler, R. O.
Hall, and W. K. Lauenroth. 2007. Quantifying uncertainty in
net primary production measurements. Pages 238–260 in T. J.
Fahey and A. K. Knapp, editors. Principles and standards
for measuring primary production. Oxford University Press,
New York, New York, USA.
Hepburn, C. D., and C. L. Hurd. 2005. Conditional mutualism
between the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera and colonial
epifauna. Marine Ecology Progress Series 302:37–48.
Hobbs, R. J., and A. Mooney. 1995. Spatial and temporal
variability in California annual grassland: results from a
long-term study. Journal of Vegetation Science 6:43–56.
Jackson, G. A. 1977. Nutrients and production of giant kelp,
Macrocystis pyrifera, off southern California. Limnology and
Oceanography 22:979–995.
Jackson, G. A. 1987. Modelling the growth and harvest yield of
the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera. Marine Biology 95:611–
624
Jobbagy, E. G., and O. E. Sala. 2000. Controls of grass and
shrub aboveground production in the Patagonian Steppe.
Ecological Applications 10:541–549.
Knapp, A. K., J. M. Briggs, J. M. Blair, and C. L. Turner. 1998.
Patterns and controls of aboveground net primary production in tallgrass prairie. Pages 193–221 in A. K. Knapp, J. M.
Briggs, D. C. Hartnett, and S. L. Collins, editors. Grassland
dynamics: long-term ecological research in tall grass prairie.
Oxford University Press, New York, New York, USA.

September 2008

NET PRIMARY PRODUCTION BY GIANT KELP

Knapp, A. K., and M. D. Smith. 2001. Variation among biomes
in temporal dynamics of aboveground primary production.
Science 291:481–484.
Li, Z., M. J. Apps, W. A. Kurz, and E. Banﬁeld. 2003.
Temporal changes of forest net primary production and net
ecosystem production in west central Canada associated with
natural and anthropogenic disturbances. Canadian Journal
of Forest Research 33:2340–2351.
Lieth, H., and R. H. Whittaker. 1975. Primary productivity of
the biosphere. Springer-Verlag, New York, New York, USA.
Mann, K. H. 2000. Ecology of coastal waters. Blackwell,
Malden, Masaschusetts, USA.
McNaughton, S. J., M. Oesterheld, D. A. Frank, and K. J.
Williams. 1989. Ecosystem-level patterns of primary productivity and herbivory in terrestrial habitats. Nature 341:142–
144.
McPhee-Shaw, E. E., D. A. Siegel, L. Washburn, M. A.
Brzezinski, J. L. Jones, A. Leydecker, and J. Melack. 2007.
Mechanisms for nutrient delivery to the inner shelf:
observations from the Santa Barbara Channel. Liminology
and Oceanography 52:1748–1766.
North, W. J. 1994. Review of Macrocystis biology. Pages 447–
527 in I. Akatsuka, editor. Biology of economic algae. SPB
Academic, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Pickett, S. T. A., and P. S. White. 1985. The ecology of natural
disturbance and patch dynamics. Academic Press, Orlando,
Florida, USA.
Quinn, G. P., and M. J. Keough. 2002. Experimental design
and data analysis for biologists. Cambridge University Press,
London, UK.
Rassweiler, A., K. K. Arkema, D. C. Reed, R. C. Zimmerman,
and M. A. Brzezinski. 2008. Net primary production, growth,
and standing crop of Macrocystis pyrifera in southern
California. Ecology 89:2068.
Reed, D. C., B. P. Kinlan, P. T. Raimondi, L. Washburn,
B. Gaylord, and P. T. Drake. 2006. A metapopulation
perspective on patch dynamics and connectivity of giant kelp.
Pages 352–386 in J. P. Kritzer and P. F. Sale, editors. Marine
metapopulations. Academic Press, San Diego, California,
USA.

2505

Reichle, D. E., J. F. Franklin, and D. W. Goodall. 1975.
Productivity of world ecosystems. National Academy of
Sciences, Washington, D.C., USA.
Runyon, J., R. H. Waring, S. N. Goward, and J. M. Wells.
1994. Environmental limits on net primary production and
light-use efﬁciency across the Oregon Transect. Ecological
Applications 4:226–237.
Sousa, W. P. 1984. The role of disturbance in natural
communities. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
15:353–391.
Sprugel, D. 1985. Natural disturbance and ecosystem energetics. Pages 335–352 in S. T. A. Pickett and P. S. White, editors.
The ecology of natural disturbance and patch dynamics.
Academic Press, Orlando, Florida, USA.
Sprugel, D. G., and F. H. Bormann. 1981. Natural disturbance
and the steady state in high-altitude balsam ﬁr forests.
Science 211:390–393.
Van Tussenbroek, B. I. 1989. Seasonal growth and composition
of fronds of Macrocystis pyrifera in the Falkland Islands.
Marine Biology 100:419–430.
Webb, W. L., W. K. Lauenroth, S. R. Szarek, and R. S.
Kinerson. 1983. Primary production and abiotic controls in
forests, grasslands, and desert ecosystems in the United
States. Ecology 64:134–151.
Wheeler, P. A., and W. J. North. 1981. Nitrogen supply, tissue
composition and frond growth rates for Macrocystis pyrifera
off the coast of southern California. Marine Biology 64:
59–69.
Zimmerman, R. C., and J. N. Kremer. 1984. Episodic nutrient
supply to a kelp forest ecosystem in southern California.
Journal of Marine Research 42:591–604.
Zimmerman, R. C., and J. N. Kremer. 1986. In situ growth and
chemical composition of the giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera:
response to temporal changes in ambient nutrient availability. Marine Ecology Progress Series 27:277–285.
Zimmerman, R. C., and D. L. Robertson. 1985. Effects of El
Niño on local hydrography and growth of the giant kelp,
Macrocystis pyrifera at Santa Catalina Island, California.
Limnology and Oceanography 30:1298–1302.

