THE BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY OF GIANT KELP FORESTS

This page intentionally left blank

THE BIOLOGY AND
ECOLOGY OF GIANT KELP
FORESTS
David R. Schiel and Michael S. Foster

university of california press

University of California Press, one of the most distinguished university
presses in the United States, enriches lives around the world by advancing
scholarship in the humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences. Its
activities are supported by the UC Press Foundation and by philanthropic
contributions from individuals and institutions. For more information,
visit www.ucpress.edu.
University of California Press
Oakland, California
© 2015 by The Regents of the University of California
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schiel, David R., author.
The biology and ecology of giant kelp forests /
David R. Schiel & Michael S. Foster.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 978-0-520-27886-8 (cloth)
isbn 978-0-520-96109-8 (ebook)
1. Giant kelp. I. Foster, Michael S., author. II. Title.
qk569.l53s35 2015
577.3-dc23
2014041839
Manufactured in the United States of America
22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of
ansi / niso Z39.48-1992 (r 2002) (Permanence of Paper).
Front cover image: Giant kelp forest, San Clemente Island, southern
California; photo courtesy Ron J. McPeak, UCSB Library Digital Collection.
Back cover image: Portion of a giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) frond;
photo by John Heine.

To the pioneers of giant kelp forest research, especially
Conrad Limbaugh, Wheeler North, and Michael Neushul,
whose love of scuba diving, observations, insights, and publications
helped in opening new frontiers.

This page intentionally left blank

CONTENTS

Preface
xi
Acknowledgments
Introduction
xv
•

•

xiii

•

PART I. THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

1.

Introduction to Giant Kelp Forests Worldwide
Taxonomic Classification
Evolution

•

3

3

6

•

Biogeography

11

•

History of Research (to 1970)

2.

•

•

16

The Structure, Function, and Abiotic Requirements
of Giant Kelp
23
•

Sporophytes
Spores

•

•

24

31

Gametophytes

•

34

Basic Abiotic Requirements

•

37

3.

The Abiotic Environment
The Kelp Environment

41

•

41

•

Substratum and Sedimentation
Temperature
Light

•

45

•

49

Nutrients

55

•

Water Motion

60

•

Concluding Comments

4.

43

•

69

•

Demography, Dispersal, and Connectivity of Populations
Demography

72

•

Metapopulations

•

78

Reproductive Output and Sources of Propagules
Spore Dispersal and Recruitment Windows
Mechanisms of Dispersal
Seed Banks

•

•

84

•

125

81

87

•

90

•

Genetic Structure of Populations

•

93

PART II. THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

5.

Giant Kelp Communities

•

A “Composite” Community

101
102

•

Variation by Biogeographic Province

•

104

Within Communities: Habitats and Patches
Temporal Variation
Diversity

6.

130

•

139

•

Detached Giant Kelp Communities, Production, and
Food / Control Webs
141
•

Detached Giant Kelp Communities
Kelp Forest Productivity

•

•

152

Facilitative and Competitive Interactions
in Giant Kelp Forests
163
•

Facilitation
Competition

8.

viii

141

148

Food Webs and Control Webs

7.

•

163

•

•

167

Grazing in Kelp Communities

•

•

177
181

Kelp–Sea Urchin Interactions

•

Why Do Urchins Rampage?

185

CONTENTS

•

•

71

Reversion of Barrens to Kelp Habitat

188

•

Other Grazers in Giant Kelp Communities

9.

•

190

Predation and Trophic Cascades in Kelp Communities
Fish Predation on Grazers

200

•

Lobster Predation on Grazers

202

•

Sea Otters and Predation on Grazers
Other Predators

197

•

•

206

212

•

PART III. HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

10.

Anthropogenic Effects on Kelp Forests

•

217

Sewage and Industrial Waste Discharge

•

218

Runoff and Coastal Modification

220

•

Intakes and Discharges from Power and Desalination Plants
Boat Traffic and Toxic Spills
Giant Kelp Harvesting

•

224

•

225

Introduced and Invasive Species

11.

227

•

Human Usage of Giant Kelp and Kelp Forest Organisms
Food and Fertilizer
Chemicals

•

235

235

•

240

•

Biofuel and Carbon Sequestration
Aquaculture

Sport Fishing

•

•

241

248

248

Commercial Fishing
•

•

246

•

Recreational Use

Other Uses

221

•

•

251

256

Restoration of Kelp Forests

259

•

Artificial Reefs, Creation of New Kelp Forests, and
“Mitigation” • 261

12.

Marine Protected Areas and Fisheries Effects
What Is a Marine Protected Area?
Design and Implementation

•

•

267

269

•

MPA Effects on Fish, Fisheries, and Communities
Gaps and the Future of MPAs

265

•

•

273

281

CONTENTS

•

ix

PART IV. GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

13.

Global Change

285

•

Climate Change Variables and Predicted Trends
Temperature

14.

286

291

•

294

Nutrients and Wave Forces

•

Ocean Acidification (OA)

295

•

Giant Kelp Forests: Conclusions and Final Thoughts
Biology of Giant Kelp
Communities
Interactions

307

•

310

•

The Future

312

•

•

•

•

311

Management

•

•

Afterword
317
References
319
Index
383

x

•

CONTENTS

•

305

•

303

PREFACE
So many interesting points are connected with the Macrocystis, that a
book might be instructively filled with its history, anatomy, physiology and
distribution; whilst its economy, its relation to other vegetables and to the
myriads of living creatures which depend on it for food, attachment, shelter and
means of transport, constitute so extensive a field of research that the mind of
a philosopher might shrink from the task of describing them.
—Hooker (1847)

Giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, dominates nearshore rocky reefs of many temperate
zone coastlines of both hemispheres. Perhaps no other single species is so important
in providing biogenic habitat in which thousands of species can live and interact. From
historical to contemporary times, giant kelp forests have been valued for their provision
of numerous food species of fish and invertebrates, biomass production, industrial uses
such as extraction of potash and alginates, and their intrinsic beauty. Darwin (1839)
compared their importance to that of terrestrial forests and seemed to have been awestruck by the diversity of life within giant kelp forests and how so many species, including native human populations, depended on them. Giant kelp forests have therefore
long stood as important components of coastal ecosystems. The reduction in kelp forest
cover in some areas, especially along heavily populated coastlines such as southern California that are subjected to multiple stressors, has spawned considerable debate about
the status of kelp forests, causative mechanisms for their sometimes great variation in
abundance, and ways to restore them and their associated communities to full functioning. With an increasing awareness of the need to maintain the integrity of communities
and ecosystems, it is timely to have a comprehensive review of one of the most important
marine ecosystems in temperate waters and the giant kelp that defines it.
Since our last book on giant kelp communities was published (Foster and Schiel
1985), there has been a considerable increase in kelp forest research and understanding,
from microscopic to ecosystem-level effects. This includes a much greater knowledge
about dispersal mechanisms, genetic relationships, long-term coast-wide variation in

xi

distribution and abundance of kelp forests, and their large-scale linkages with the ocean
climate. At the same time there has been increasing emphasis on management and
conservation, especially through marine protected areas and reduction in fishing pressure on species that can be strong interactors in food web dynamics. As in many areas
where societal values, general awareness of the imperative need for better management
of natural resources, strong advocacy, and science intersect, the debates can be heated
about underlying mechanisms and how best to proceed.
We address these issues here with an up-to-date presentation of what is known scientifically about giant kelp, their forests worldwide, and how they function. We include
a review of the literature, both from peer-reviewed publications in scientific journals
and the “gray” literature of reports to state and federal agencies, which are often not
reviewed externally and can be difficult to obtain. We were as comprehensive as possible in using the literature available to August 2014. We also point readers to several
published reviews, which give details of various aspects of giant kelp biology and kelp
forest ecology (Dayton 1985a, Schiel and Foster 1986, 2006, Graham, Vásquez et al.
2007, Foster and Schiel 2010, Foster et al. 2013). We have endeavored to provide the currently accepted scientific names for genera and species, based on listings in AlgaeBase,
WoRMS, and FishBase. The pace of name changes continues to increase, however, so
we encourage readers wishing to know the current names and their history to consult
the appropriate databases and associated literature.
Finally, we emphasize the continuing need for empirical, field-based studies, not just
new models and meta-analyses, to provide the necessary underpinnings for advancing
knowledge and informed management. We hope our book proves to be a useful resource
for students, scientists, managers, and the general public who share our passion and
concern for these iconic parts of the marine ecosystem.

xii

•

PREFACE

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the many colleagues who have provided advice, critique, information, discussion, photographs, and personal communications. We especially thank Dan Reed, John
Pearse, and Mike Graham who took on the prodigious task of reviewing the entire manuscript and provided much valuable comment and criticism. We thank Genny Jo Schiel
for her dedication and talents in producing the figures and artwork. Many others helped
in various ways, and we gratefully acknowledge their contributions to this book: Stacie
Lilley (for the massive task of checking and compiling all references, obtaining permissions, and proofreading); Kerry South (for pitching in when needed); Linda and Alan
McCarter (for providing a quiet place for DRS to write); Bruce Menge and Jane Lubchenco
who hosted DRS during a sabbatical at Oregon State University; and Joan Parker and
the staff of the Moss Landing Marine Laboratory library for tracking down references.
For personal communications, information, or reviews of parts of the book and photos,
we thank Robert Anderson, Craig Barilotti, Jarrett Byrnes, Inka Bartsch, Roger Beattie,
Ed Bierman, John Carter, Kyle Cavanaugh, Jiaxin Chen, Louis Druehl, Matt Edwards,
Rebecca Flores Miller, Jon Geller, Mike Graham, Michael Guiry, Kamille Hammerstrom,
John Heine, Gustavo Hernández-Carmona, Lawrence Honma, Joanna Kain, Brenda
Konar, David Kushner, Chris McQuaid, Ron McPeak (via the University of California
at Santa Barbara Library Digital Collection), Dieter Müller, Peter Neushul, Dan Reed,
Susan Saupe, John Steinbeck, Feijiu Wang, James Watanabe, and Renado Westermeier.
We gratefully acknowledge Moss Landing Marine Laboratories for literature and technical support of MSF, Canterbury University and the School of Biological Sciences for

xiii

their continued support of DRS, and the funding bodies which supported this work,
especially the New Zealand Ministry of Science and Innovation, the Royal Society of
New Zealand Marsden Fund, and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation of New York, which
have generously supported the research and writing of DRS. The online resources of
Google Scholar, Google Earth, AlgaeBase, WoRMS (World Register of Marine Species),
FishBase, and Wikipedia were invaluable in accessing information. Finally, we thank UC
Press, especially Chuck Crumly, who invited us to write this book, and our editor, Merrik
Bush-Pirkle, who graciously guided it to fruition.

xiv

•

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

INTRODUCTION
There is one marine production, which from its importance is worthy of a
particular history… I know few things more surprising than to see this plant
growing and flourishing amidst those great breakers of the western ocean,
which no mass of rock, let it be ever so hard, can long resist. The number of
living creatures of all orders, whose existence intimately depends on the kelp, is
wonderful. A great volume might be written, describing the inhabitants of one
of these beds of sea-weed… I can only compare these great aquatic forests of
the southern hemisphere with the terrestrial ones in the intertropical regions.
Yet if the latter should be destroyed in any country, I do not believe nearly so
many species of animals would perish, as, under similar circumstances, would
happen with the kelp. Amidst the leaves of this plant numerous species of
fish live, which nowhere else would find food or shelter; with their destruction
the many cormorants, divers, and other fishing birds, the otters, seals, and
porpoises, would soon perish also.
—Darwin (1839)

Giant kelp (Macrocystis) forests support some of the most species-rich communities on
earth. With plants reported up to 60 m long growing from the seafloor and extending
along the sea surface in lush canopies, these forests are true “biogenic engineers” that
provide extensive vertical habitat in a largely two-dimensional seascape, alter the light
environment, and dampen water motion. Well before Darwin (1839) published the first
observations on their ecology, these forests provided food and other resources for human
populations. Even with only limited observations from the sea surface and collections,
Darwin was clearly fascinated by giant kelp and the diverse organisms associated with
it, and made the first analogy between this community and terrestrial forests. There
were a few subsequent reports on Macrocystis distribution, morphology, and growth,
but it was around a hundred years after Darwin’s observations in South America that
the study of giant kelp forest ecology began. Andrews’ (1945) pioneering research on
the fauna of giant kelp holdfasts included some underwater observations made during
surface-supplied, hard-hat diving, but this and other early studies were hampered by
the lack of simple diving equipment. With the advent of scuba in the early 1950s, direct
observations of kelp forests became relatively simple and, because of mounting concern

xv

over the effects of sewage discharges, loss of kelp habitat, and possible impacts of kelp
harvesting, several kelp research programs were started.
The considerable amount of research and monitoring in the 69 years since Andrews’
time has provided information from which to glean a more comprehensive view of the
biology and ecology of giant kelp, and the structuring forces that determine its production and abundance patterns. This includes studies on plant structure, physiology, and
growth, molecular studies on phylogenetic relationships, observations and experiments
on structuring processes and interactions, aerial surveys of kelp canopy abundance,
subtidal monitoring of plant and community structure, and climatic and oceanic processes that affect giant kelp. These studies encompass not only the pioneering work done
along the coast of California but also, especially over the past 30 years, considerable work
in several southern hemisphere countries where giant kelp also occurs. Common aims
of research have been to understand the environmental drivers underlying the great
spatial and temporal variation in kelp forests and the role of food web (trophic) dynamics in these fluctuations. Recent and historical overextraction of top predators such as
sea otters, fishes, and lobsters, grazing by sea urchins, and numerous stressors such as
sedimentation, increased coastal runoff of nutrients, alteration to coastal morphology,
and huge increases in populations of coastal cities have contributed to kelp fluctuations
and losses. It is clear that spatial and temporal variation in Macrocystis is controlled not
by a single factor but by many, usually acting in concert.
Our aim is to describe the giant kelp forest environment and to discuss the sources
of variability in the distribution and abundance of the organisms in it, especially that
of Macrocystis. We do this with reference to the complete life history of the kelp, from
spores through to the large sporophyte stages, and the biotic and abiotic environment
in which they live. In Part II, we discuss worldwide community structure, productivity,
competition, demography, grazing, and predation, and, where possible, their influence
on different phases of the life cycle of Macrocystis. Part III addresses human uses, effects
and management of giant kelp, and associated forest organisms. We end with Part IV on
climate change and our conclusions, with suggestions for future research. We trust that
this comprehensive treatment, along with its figures and extensive reference list, will aid
others in studying, understanding, enjoying, and managing giant kelp communities.

x vi

•

INTRODUCTION

PART I

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

This page intentionally left blank

1
INTRODUCTION TO GIANT
KELP FORESTS WORLDWIDE
After a very attentive examination of many hundreds of specimens, we have
arrived at the conclusion that all the described species of this genus which have
come under our notice may safely be referred to as Macrocystis pyrifera.
—Hooker (1847)

Numerous recent studies on Macrocystis interfertility, genetic relatedness, and
morphological plasticity all suggest that the genus is monospecific. We propose
that the genus be collapsed back into a single species, with nomenclatural
priority given to M. pyrifera.
—Demes et al. (2009)

TA XO N O MI C CL A S S IFI C ATI O N

Macrocystis, commonly called giant kelp but also known as giant bladder kelp, string
kelp (Australia), huiro (Chile), and sargasso gigante (Mexico), is a genus of brown algae,
a group characterized by containing the accessory photosynthetic pigment fucoxanthin
that gives them their characteristic color. Historically, brown algae were classified as
plants in the Domain Eukaryota, Kingdom Plantae, and Phylum (Division) Phaeophyta.
The Plantae contained most terrestrial plants and also included two other common
algal phyla with multicellular species, the green (Chlorophyta) and red algae (Rhodophyta). Collectively, the large marine species in these three phyla are commonly called
“seaweeds.” It is now recognized through modern techniques, however, that brown and
red seaweeds have characteristics so distinct that they are separate from true “plants.”
High-resolution microscopy has revealed striking differences in plastid and flagella
morphology among many of the traditional plant phyla, or groups within them, as well
as similarities in flagella morphology and other characteristics to some colorless flagellates. These more fundamental relationships have generally been supported by analyses
of genetic similarities and a better understanding of the role of endosymbiosis in shaping the photosynthetic apparatus. This flood of new information and interpretation has
led to fundamental taxonomic rearrangements and the creation of new kingdoms, but

3

there is still debate about appropriate classification (e.g., Parfrey et al. 2006). Revisions
will no doubt continue, but the basic classification scheme of Cavalier-Smith (2010) is
currently accepted by most phycologists (e.g., Graham et al. 2009, Guiry and Guiry
2012). This scheme places the former Phaeophyta within the Kingdom Chromista,
Phylum Ochrophyta, Class Phaeophyceae, with “kelp” being the term used to refer to
members in the order Laminariales (figure 1.1). Diatoms are the other major group in
the Ochrophyta. The kingdom name Heterokontophyta is preferred by some researchers, others use Stramenopila (discussion in Graham et al. 2009), while some prefer the
supergroup designation Chromaveolata (e.g., Adl et al. 2005, Cock et al. 2010).
Within the order Laminariales, giant kelp is now usually placed in the family Laminariaceae (Lane et al. 2006, Guiry and Guiry 2012). Based on genetic similarities, Yoon
et al. (2001) placed Macrocystis within the family Lessoniaceae but Lane et al. (2006)
argued this lacked bootstrap support. Genetic analyses in both studies indicate that the
kelp genera Pelagophycus, Nereocystis, and Postelsia are most closely related to Macrocystis, forming a clade or two closely related clades within the family (figure 1.1). There has
been considerable taxonomic work on Macrocystis and the genus is now considered to be
monospecific, the sole species worldwide being Macrocystis pyrifera (discussed below).
Pelagophycus, Nereocystis, and Postelsia are also considered to be monospecific (Guiry
and Guiry 2012) and are endemic to the Northeast Pacific. All but Postelsia form subtidal
kelp forests (Abbott and Hollenberg 1976).
“Kelp” originally referred to the calcined ashes resulting from burning large brown
algae. It is sometimes used as the common name for all large brown algae, but particularly species in the order Laminariales. In this book, we use “kelp” to mean only
species in this order. Some argue that kelps should be called chromistans, ocrophytes,
phaeophyceans, etc., and not plants, because they are no longer in the kingdom Plantae.
Although taxonomically correct, these names are awkward in usage, so we will refer to
kelps and other algae as seaweeds, algae, or plants.
Macrocystis and its putative species have undergone considerable taxonomic revision
since originally being described in 1771 by Linnaeus, who included it with other brown
algae under the name Fucus pyriferus (reviews in Womersley 1954, Neushul 1971a, Coyer
et al. 2001, Demes et al. 2009). Agardh (1820) placed F. pyriferus into a separate genus,
Macrocystis, and described three species based on differences in blade and float (pneumatocyst) morphology. The number of species based on these characters increased to
10 by the mid-1800s. Hooker’s (1847) extensive field observations indicated these characters were highly variable and he argued there was only one species, M. pyrifera. Recognition of variability in these characteristics led to species revisions based primarily on
holdfast morphology. This character was not considered by early investigators because
they relied on specimens collected by others, specimens that generally did not include
holdfasts (Womersley 1954). More recent investigators examined plants as they grew
in the field, and used holdfast morphology as the primary character to distinguish
species. This resulted in three commonly recognized species in both hemispheres:

4

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

Kingdom Chromista (“colored”)
Members have a plastid bounded by four membranes and containing chlorophyll a
and c and various xanthophylls. Also includes organisms that have lost these
characteristics but are closely related, based on multigene trees.
Phylum Ochrophyta (“golden-brown”)
Chromists with two flagella, one smooth and one with tripartite tubular hairs, or with
modified versions of this structure.
Class Phaeophyceae (“dusky seaweed”)
Brown algae. Ochrophytes with chromistan plastids, ochrophycean flagella (on spores and/or gametes) and multicellular thalli
with alginate in the cell wall. Parenchymatous members have
pores or plasmodesmata between cells.
Order Laminariales (“flat blade”)
Kelps. Phaeophyceans that have an alternation of generations:
gametophytes (haploid) are small, free-living, and filamentous
with apical growth; sporophytes (diploid) are large, free-living,
and parenchymatous with intercalary growth.
Family Laminariaceae
Members are currently based on genetic affinities. There are no
common morphological features distinct from other families in
this order.
Clade with Macrocystis and its closest relatives
(Illustrated below). The three kelps to the left can reach lengths
of 10s of meters.

Macrocystis
pyrifera

Laminaria farlowii
illustrating a typical
species of the type
genus of the order

Kelps forming canopies on sea surface

Smaller kelp (~0.25 m)

Pelagophycus
porra

Postelsia
palmaeformis

Nereocystis
luetkeana

figure 1.1
Macrocystis classification based on genetic and morphological characteristics, the primary ones of
which are listed. See Chapter 1 text for references.

M. pyrifera, M. integrifolia, and M. angustifolia (Womersley 1954, Neushul 1971a). Hay
(1986) described a fourth species, M. laevis, from the subantarctic Marion Islands based
on its unusually smooth blades (compared to rugose / corrugated blades in other recognized giant kelp species). Morphometric measurements and transplant experiments
by Brostoff (1988) showed that the holdfast morphology of M. angustifolia populations
described by Neushul (1971a) in California intergraded with that of M. pyrifera. M.
angustifolia was subsequently considered to occur only in the southern hemisphere (e.g.,
Macaya and Zuccarello 2010a).
Holdfast morphology did not stand up to scrutiny as a species indicator, however, as
more research was done. Field observations and transplant experiments have shown that
holdfast morphology varies with environment and that blade smoothness also does not
distinguish species well (review in Demes et al. 2009; figure 1.2). Genetic and molecular studies confirm that external morphological characters are not good discriminators
of species. Lewis and Neushul (1994) showed that the three “species” (M. ‘pyrifera’ and
M. ‘integrifolia’ from the Northeast Pacific, and M. ‘angustifolia’ from Australia) distinguished by differences in holdfast morphology could hybridize and produce normal
sporophytes, and Westermeier et al. (2007) produced hybrids with normal sporophytes
in crosses of M. ‘pyrifera’ and M. ‘integrifolia’ from Chile. Molecular taxonomic work
comparing the similarity of noncoding rDNA internal transcribed spacer regions (ITS1
and ITS2) by Coyer et al. (2001), and DNA barcoding (Macaya and Zuccarello 2010a) of
all four “species” in the southern hemisphere and M. pyrifera and M. integrifolia in the
northern hemisphere indicate that Macrocystis is a monospecific genus, and this was
confirmed by Astorga et al. (2012). All these findings indicate there is only one species
of giant kelp, M. pyrifera (Linnaeus) C. Agardh, and this is currently accepted (Guiry
and Guiry 2012). Unless otherwise noted, therefore, we refer to this species in the text
as giant kelp or Macrocystis. However, when referring to the literature on Macrocystis it
can be advantageous for clarity to refer to the former species names. Where necessary
we designate these, including M. ‘pyrifera,’ as ecomorphs by enclosing the ecomorph
name in quotes.

E VO LU TI O N

The timing of origins of kelp and their relatives is problematic and not completely
resolved, but significant progress has been made in the past 20 years. A variety of morphological, biochemical, and, most recently, genetic evidence indicates that species in
the kingdom Chromista, as well as other photosynthetic eukaryotes, obtained their
plastids via endosymbiosis with other organisms that took up residence inside cells
(reviews in Yoon et al. 2004, Graham et al. 2009) early in the evolution of eukaryotic organisms. Primary endosymbiosis between prokaryotic cyanobacteria (blue-green
algae) and eukaryotic protists resulted in the red and green algae (with green algae
being the progenitor of “higher plants”). A secondary endosymbiosis between a uni-

6

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

A

A

B
C

Depth

B

C

D

E

figure 1.2
The development and holdfast morphology of Macrocystis ecomorphs, beginning as a small sporophyte (top left). (A) M. ‘integrifolia,’ (B) M. ‘augustifolia,’ and (C) M. ‘pyrifera.’ (D) The smooth blade
morphology of M. ‘laevis’ compared to (E) more typical corrugated Macrocystis blades. ‘Depth’ indicates the relative depth distribution, from shallow to deep, of the holdfast ecomorphs.
source: Modified from Demes et al. (2009), reprinted with permission from Wiley Publishing.

cellular red alga and another eukaryotic protist resulted in the golden-brown algae, a
lineage of which was the progenitor of kelps. Given the number of green chloroplast
genes in the genome of the fi lamentous brown alga Ectocarpus siliculosus, the protist
in the partnership that produced the brown algae may have been previously inhabited
by a green chloroplast (Cock et al. 2010). Molecular clock methods indicate that red
and green algae arose around 1500 Ma (Ma = SI unit for mega-annum or million years
ago), and the secondary symbiosis that eventually led to the chromists occurred around
1300 Ma (Yoon et al. 2004) during the late Mesoproterzoic era, after the earth’s transition to a more highly oxygenated atmosphere with an ozone screen (Cloud 1976).
Fossil evidence (Cloud 1976) is consistent with these gene-based estimates. Medlin
et al. (1997) suggested the chromists originated between 275 and 175 Ma (in the Permian–Jurassic period), but Yoon et al. (2004) suggested a much earlier origin at about
1000 Ma at the Mesoproterozoic–Neoproterozoic boundary, with the Ochrophyta arising soon afterward. An earlier study by Saunders and Druehl (1992) analyzed 5S rRNA
similarities and concluded that the Phaeophyceae originated “within 200 Ma.” Medlin

INTRODUCTION TO GIANT KELP FORESTS WORLDWIDE

•

7

Ma

MAJOR EVENTS / RADIATIONS

Charophytes

Secondary
endosymbiosis

1600
Paleo

Primary endosymbiosis

3500

OPISTHOKONTA (Animals, Fungi)

1200
Meso

Glaucophytes

Proterozoic

Chlorophytes

900

Haptophytes

Neo

Red Algae (Cyanidiales)

543

OCH
Chromists

Paleozoic

Cryptophytes

248

Red Algae

Florideophycidae

150

Bryophytes

Mesozoic

PHA

65

Ferns

20
Cenozoic

Gymnosperms

LAM

5

Angiosperms

MAC

ERA

CB

Earliest Archean eubacterial fossil

figure 1.3
Evolutionary timing and relationships leading to Macrocystis.
Ma = millions of years ago; CB = cyanobacteria; OCH = Ochrophytes; PHA = Phaeophytes;
LAM = Laminariales; MAC = Macrocystis.
source: Modified from Yoon et al. (2004), reprinted with permission from Oxford University Press.

et al. (1997) estimated this origin at 150–90 Ma (in the Jurassic–Cretaceous period)
from a molecular clock analysis based on 18S rRNAs (figure 1.3).
The fossil record has not shed much light on the origins and radiation of kelp and
other brown algae because, with the exception of a few lightly calcified species, they lack
hard parts and do not fossilize well. There are no calcified Laminariales and the only

8

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

P

figure 1.4
Julescraneia grandicornis from the upper Miocene of California. The fossil and inset reconstruction
(with the fossil location indicated by the rectangle), pneumatocyst (P) is about 16 cm in diameter.
source: From Parker and Dawson (1965), reprinted with permission from Schweizerbart Science Publishing (www.schweizerbart.de).

fossil found so far that is generally accepted as a kelp is the extinct species Julescraneia
grandicornis from the Miocene Monterey formation in southern California (Parker and
Dawson 1965). This fossil consists of impressions on two rock fragments, one with a
portion of a blade and another with “antler-like branches from a large pneumatocyst”
(figure 1.4). Parker and Dawson (1965) interpreted J. grandicornis as having characteristics of modern Pelagophycus and Nereocystis, which are close relatives of Macrocystis
(cf. figure 1.1). The deposit was dated at 13.5–7.5 Ma (upper Miocene). The molecular
clock analyses of Saunders and Druehl (1992) and their review of similar analyses by
others indicate kelps diverged from other brown algae 30–16 Ma (Oligocene–Miocene),
and that morphologically similar kelp taxa radiated 3 – 6 Ma. These periods roughly
correspond to those suggested by Lüning and Dieck (1990) based on temperature tolerances and paleo-oceanographic conditions (figure 1.3). Saunders and Druehl (1992)
pointed out that “The extensive morphological variation observed among the kelp comes
from genotypically similar plants.” They reference other studies supporting these dates,
including the fossil record of kelp-associated limpets, the number of monospecific kelp
taxa, biogeographic distributions, and hybridization among kelps.
Various selective processes may have stimulated the radiation of kelp genera and
species within the times discussed above. Evolutionary attention has been focused on
processes in the North Pacific region because it contains the greatest diversity of kelps
(review in Lane et al. 2006) and is therefore considered to be the likely area of origin
and high diversification. Various processes have been hypothesized as being primary

INTRODUCTION TO GIANT KELP FORESTS WORLDWIDE

•

9

drivers of kelp evolution. Modern kelps occur in generally cool temperate waters and
so the primary evolutionary processes are likely to be related to paleoenvironmental changes that caused North Pacific waters to cool. A series of ice ages between
23.7 and 5.3 Ma (Miocene) cooled the North Pacific, as did the growth of the Isthmus
of Panama, both of which generally coincided with the appearance of kelps (review in
Stanley 2009). Some argue that trophic dynamics were a factor. For example, Estes and
Steinberg (1988) wrote that kelp evolution in the region from Canada to northern Japan
was facilitated by predatory marine mammals like sea otters that primarily foraged at
depths shallower than 30 m, a depth range that coincided with the high-light zone that
most kelps occupy. Their proposed mechanism was that by eating sea urchins, which
can be extensive grazers of kelp, these mammals removed a potential impediment to
kelp evolution. Domning (1989), a noted marine mammal biologist, countered their
argument by pointing out that Stellar’s sea cows (Hydrodamalis gigas, large, surfacedwelling, herbivorous marine mammals related to dugongs and manatees, which were
hunted to extinction around 1770) and their relatives were also present, and grazing by
these mammals may have affected kelp evolution. He questioned the assumption that
the strength of the modern sea otter / sea urchin / kelp interaction applies to the past,
given that the dynamics of kelp stands may have been quite different then. He further
postulated that kelp diversification may have occurred in habitats, including those in
deep water, that were inaccessible to predatory and grazing mammals.
The degree to which the various processes affected kelp evolution remains unresolved, but there is some intriguing recent evidence that past notions of the causes of
shallow-water diversification as well as modern distributions may have to be altered if
kelp radiation occurred in deep water. Hypotheses about diversification are commonly
based on attempted reconstructions of past physical and ecological processes operating
in shallow, cold, surface waters (<30 m) where modern kelps are most abundant. However, the increasing use of deep SCUBA diving, remotely operated vehicles (ROVs), and
remote sensing technologies has shown that kelp can be abundant in deep temperate
waters (>30 m) if they are clear and transmit light to the depths (review in Spalding et al.
2003). For example, non-float-bearing kelps can be found to 45 m deep in central California (Spalding et al. 2003) and to 130 m in southern California (Lissner and Dorsey
1986). Perissinotto and McQuaid (1992) discovered stands of Macrocystis nearly 70 m
deep at Prince Edward Island in the Southern Ocean (the fronds of this population did
not reach the sea surface). Graham, Kinlan, et al. (2007) developed a model to predict
kelp distribution in tropical waters using the photosynthetic compensation depth of kelp
and the depth of the mixed layer below which nutrients are sufficient for kelp growth.
The model predicted both the known distribution of kelp in the tropics and that kelp
populations could occur to depths of 200 m on hard substrata when light, temperature,
and nutrients are suitable. The recognition that kelps are common in clear, deep waters,
including those in the tropics, should lead to a re-evaluation of the causes of kelp diversification and distribution.

10

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

Other hypotheses about processes shaping kelp evolution emphasize potential selection by the abiotic environment leading to the occupation of new habitats. For example, moving from the sea bottom to sea surface in the subtidal zone traverses diverse
hydrodynamic conditions, from a benthic boundary layer to a surge zone to mid-water
mixing, with orbital motion in breaking surf at the surface. Neushul (1972) argued that
many developmental and morphological features of kelps may reflect the consequences
of these changes because they affect phenomena such as nutrient availability and the
ability of kelp to remain attached to the substratum. All kelp sporophytes have a similar
morphology as juveniles, consisting of a small holdfast and a short stipe bearing a single
blade (figure 1.1). It may be that this universal morphology, which involves juvenile kelp
quickly getting blades elevated above the substratum on a stipe, is an adaptation that
makes it more difficult for benthic grazers to remove the blade, the primary site of photosynthesis. Selection in response to abiotic factors such as water motion and gradients
of light intensity and spectral composition between the surface and the bottom may
have affected the morphology of float-bearing kelps like Macrocystis that occupy the full
water column. These and numerous other habitat–kelp relationships indicate that the
diversification of genera and species within the Laminariales inhabiting communities
from deep water to the wave-swept rocky intertidal zone was most likely influenced by
myriad biotic and abiotic variables. Sorting out these relationships and their relative
influences is difficult in the present, let alone trying to reconstruct the past. Although
the present often holds the key to the past, there are many possible keys that probably
turned together. New molecular tools will clarify phylogenetic relationships, but the
thorny problem of understanding the underpinning evolutionary forces that produced
kelp diversification will most likely remain in the realm of plausible “just so” stories
and speculation without a better fossil record and more detailed paleo-oceanographic
information.

B I O GE O G R A P H Y

Assuming that Macrocystis evolved a few million years ago, what may have influenced its
biogeographic distribution and differences among populations? Giant kelp occurs along
the west coast of North America, but it is most widely distributed in the southern hemisphere where there are populations along the east and west coasts of South America,
off southern South Africa, Tasmania and south Australia, central and southern New
Zealand and its offshore islands, and the subantarctic islands. Recent work by Macaya
and Zuccarello (2010b) clarifies the geographic occurrence of Macrocystis (figure 1.5)
and highlights the broad distributional pattern of the species and ecomorphs. In the
southern hemisphere, giant kelp occurs from as far north as Peru, at around 6° S latitude, and as far south as the subantarctic islands, at around 57° S. These latitudes span
water temperatures that reach as low as a few degrees Celsius during parts of the year
to as high as around 25°C in subtropical areas of the north. In the northern hemisphere,

INTRODUCTION TO GIANT KELP FORESTS WORLDWIDE

•

11

the latitudinal range was thought to be from around 27° N latitude in Baja California,
Mexico, to around Sitka, Alaska, at 57° N (Druehl 1970, 1981), but the northern limit
was recently extended as a few small stands were found in Alaska to 60° N at Icy Bay
and southwest to Kodiak Island (Saupe 2011). Chapter 5 provides more detailed distributional information as well as descriptions of forests across biogeographic regions.
As for other species with anti-tropical distributions, it is generally thought that
temperature is the chief barrier to geographic expansion into warmer waters (Hedgpeth 1957). However, despite the generalization that temperature can be a major factor
limiting the distribution of seaweeds, acting on various life history stages (van den
Hoek 1982), it seems clear that water temperature alone poses few biogeographic limits
on giant kelp. For example, the general inverse relationship between temperature and
nutrients in central and southern California, and Baja California, Mexico (Jackson 1977,
Edwards and Estes 2006, Lucas et al. 2011), indicates that nutrients can affect expansion
and distribution, and this has been shown by Graham, Kinlan et al. (2007) to affect kelp
distribution in the tropics. Biogeographically, the southern latitudinal limit of giant kelp
in the southern hemisphere coincides with the furthest landmasses in the cold temperate zone between the southern continents and Antarctica. On a wider geographic scale,
wave force may well be a primary influence on the distribution of giant kelp. Our own
personal observations, those of Hooker (1847), more recent algal studies (e.g., Smith
and Smith 1998), and oceanographic studies all highlight the severe wave climate of the
Southern Ocean. This region has consistently high wind speeds, little variation in wind
direction, and no continental land barriers to impede wind and waves forces (Tomczak
and Godfrey 2003). Nevertheless, the subantarctic islands have extensive giant kelp
forests, but almost exclusively along lee shores and in protected inlets, despite being
surrounded by some of the most tumultuous seas in the world.
It may well be the case that a combination of cold water and low light acting on the
various life history stages of giant kelp prevents range expansion toward the poles (cf. van
den Hoek 1982, Jackson 1987). However, Gaines and Lubchenco (1982) suggested that
because herbivory increases inversely with latitude, the spread of kelp into warmer waters
may also be limited by grazing. Their model, like some others for kelp diversification
(see Evolution section above), is based on modern grazing interactions in shallow water.
Whether these interactions are similar in deep water now or were in the past is unknown.
Early hypotheses about the origin and spread of Macrocystis were based primarily on
its present distribution, the number of species in the genus thought to be present in the
two hemispheres at the time, fossil evidence, and the distribution of other kelp species
and genera (review in Coyer et al. 2001). Parker and Dawson (1965) and North (1971a)
concluded, based on the more widespread distribution of the genus in the southern
hemisphere, that there was a southern hemisphere origin of giant kelp with an expansion to the north (figure 1.5). They argued that a longer residence time in the southern
hemisphere, indicated by the greater number of giant kelp species described there (at the
time), also supported this hypothesis. Nicholson (1979) favored a northern hemisphere

12

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

Macrocystis
‘pyrifera’
‘integrigolia’
‘angustifolia’
‘laevis’

AC
60° N
Kodiak Island
CC

Point Conception
Bahía Asunción
Panamic Portal
Gulf of Guayaquil

BC

AGC

0°
Valparaíso
Chilóe
Rio Colorado

EAC

P-CC

SC

BRC
FC
ACC
60° S

figure 1.5
Worldwide distribution of Macrocystis and its ecomorphs, important biogeographic locations, and relationships to major currents.
Currents: AC = Alaskan; ACC = Antarctic Circumpolar also known as the West Wind Drift; AGC = Agulhas; BC = Bengula; BRC = Brazil; CC = California; EAC = East Australian;
FC = Falkland; P-CC = Peru-Chile; SC = Southland.
notes: Open circles in the Southern Hemisphere indicate Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ around subantarctic islands, as does the diamond for M. ‘laevis’.
source: Modified from Macaya and Zuccarello (2010a), with permission from Wiley Publishing.

origin with spread to the south because more related kelp genera occur in the north and
the fossil Julescraneia was found there. Chin et al. (1991) suggested a vicariant origin
with Macrocystis evolving where it occurs now from a widespread ancestral complex.
This hypothesis is not supported by the genetic analyses discussed below. The former
hypotheses require explaining how, assuming conditions were somewhat similar to
the present, a cold water species like Macrocystis crossed the equator, and how it moved
north against the southward-flowing California Current or south against the northwardflowing Peru–Chile Current. Parker and Dawson (1965) suggested crossing the equator
may have occurred during a period like the late Pliocene–Pleistocene (2–0.1 Ma) when
temperatures were lower. Spread counter to the flow of major currents may have been
via the transport of drifting reproductive plants in countercurrents and eddies (Nicholson 1979). Spread within the southern hemisphere could have been relatively rapid due
to the cold, circular, west to east flow of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (figure 1.5)
where, as observed by Hooker (1847) and many others, vast amounts of drift Macrocystis
can occur. With speeds up to 1.8 km hour−1 (Fyfe and Saenko 2005), this current could
disperse drifting Macrocystis as well as attached animals, such as the brooding pelecypod Gaimardia trapesina, between suitable habitats (Helmuth et al. 1994).
Early evidence and speculation about the origins of Macrocystis have been superseded
to some extent by recent studies. A better understanding of genetic structure and relatedness, morphological plasticity, dispersal via surface drift, and depth distribution now
point strongly to Macrocystis having originated in the northern hemisphere and then
spreading south, with Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ the likely northern source (Astorga et al.
2012). As discussed earlier (see the “Taxonomic Classification” section) genetic and morphological data indicate that Macrocystis is one species with several ecomorphs, eliminating the argument for a southern hemisphere origin based on having more species there.
Moreover, genetic analyses by Coyer et al. (2001) of relationships between and within
ecomorphs and within and between hemispheres show that populations in the southern
hemisphere are more similar to each other than those in the northern hemisphere. This
evidence combined with the greater diversity of the genetic sequences in individuals
from the north are indications that Macrocystis has existed longer in the northern than
in the southern hemisphere (Coyer et al. 2001), and therefore is of northern origin. High
genetic similarity among southern hemisphere populations indicates either high gene
flow or very recent dispersal (Coyer et al. 2001, Macaya and Zuccarello 2010b), most likely
from western South America where the landmass is continuous south of the distribution
of Macrocystis along the west coast of North America. Coyer et al. (2001) speculated that
there were probably multiple crossings between 3.1 Ma and as recent as 0.01 Ma.
The argument that giant kelp spread across the equator has become less problematic
with improved knowledge of opportunities and mechanisms. Lindberg (1991) reviewed
the biological and paleo-oceanographic evidence for interchange across the equator
and concluded there were two main periods when this occurred. One was during the
Pliocene (5.3–1.6 Ma) when northern species moved south as cooling occurred because

14

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

of the closure of the Panamic Portal and the other was in the early Pleistocene (about
1 Ma) when species moved in both directions as a result of glacial cooling and increased
upwelling. The importance of upwelling is difficult to assess because glaciation cycles
also caused changes in sea level that may have affected upwelling (Lindberg 1991) as
well as the distribution and abundance of giant kelp (Graham et al. 2003). Because
giant kelp can grow in deep water (e.g., Perissinotto and McQuaid 1992) and it is now
known that other kelps occur in deep tropical waters (review in Graham, Kinlan, et al.
2007), the tropical thermal barrier appears to be less daunting and, historically, more
permeable because the spread of kelp across the equator could potentially have occurred
through submerged populations. The probability that spread across the equator could
have occurred by surface drift of adult plants has also increased because we now know
that rafts of giant kelp can be driven against currents by the wind, and can survive and
produce viable spores for over 100 days and hundreds of kilometers if surface temperatures are suitable (Macaya et al. 2005, Hernández-Carmona et al. 2006, Rothäusler et
al. 2011). Alberto et al. (2011) determined that current speed and direction, combined
with spore production, explained more of the genetic differences in giant kelp populations than geographic distance and habitat continuity, at least on a regional scale. It
remains to be determined, however, if spores from drift giant kelp can arrive in suitable
habitats at great enough densities and with the genetic diversity likely to produce viable
new populations. Drifters may not be important locally over short time scales but may
be important regionally over long time scales, especially if very large masses of giant
kelp strand on shore and release spores.
We have outlined where Macrocystis occurs and potential influences on its range
limits but an intriguing question is, why doesn’t it occur elsewhere, particularly along
the coastlines of the western Pacific Ocean? This question is an old one, first posed in
the literature by Setchell (1932). In discussing the worldwide distribution of Macrocystis,
he noted that “the waters of the Bering Sea, of the Ochotsk, and the Kuriles are probably not colder than those of Cape Horn, South Georgia, the Falklands, and those of
the Antarctic islands. Hence its absence presents the question: specific identities or
seasonal or other variables?” Whatever the underlying mechanisms for the absence of
giant kelp from the shores of the western Pacific, a combination of prevailing currents,
cold temperatures, seasonal ice, low light, and competition with other kelps would have
helped prevent the spread of Macrocystis westward. Furthermore, the ice bridge along
the Bering Sea between Alaska and eastern Siberia may have prevented the spread of
giant kelp over much of its history. During the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), other
algal taxa were not abundant. Caissie et al. (2010) pointed out that during the LGM
through to the early deglacial period (23,000–17,000 years ago) there were more than
6 months of sea ice present each year, corresponding with low diatom concentrations.
As ice-free conditions later prevailed, there was a transition from diatom assemblages
dominated by sea-ice species to those dominated by species indicative of high productivity. Similarly, de Vernal et al. (2005) found that dinocyst concentrations were lower

INTRODUCTION TO GIANT KELP FORESTS WORLDWIDE

•

15

during the LGM, which they interpreted as being the result of limited biogenic production due to limited light because of permanent or quasi-permanent sea-ice cover. With
respect to Macrocystis, both Graham, Vásquez, et al. (2007) and Macaya and Zuccarrello
(2010a, 2010b) concluded that glaciations probably had a great effect on the distribution, abundance, and productivity of giant kelp. A more recent paper highlights this
possibility for a similar large, drifting alga of the southern hemisphere. Fraser et al.
(2009) used molecular techniques to assess the history of the southern bull kelp, Durvillaea antarctica (the largest fucoid alga, not a laminarian kelp), across the southern
hemisphere landmasses. They found considerable genetic diversity among northern
and southern Chilean sites, and around the coast of mainland New Zealand. Samples
across the subantarctic islands, however, showed remarkable genetic homogeneity. Fraser et al. interpreted this similarity across the vast distances of the subantarctic islands
as the result of subantarctic kelp populations being eliminated during the LGM due to
ice scour, with recolonization occurring through a series of long-distance rafting events.
As in all areas where reconstructions, correlative evidence, and informed surmisal
are involved, we will probably never know why giant kelp did not get to some regions of
the Pacific basin and establish unless, of course, it suddenly appears there and we can
determine how it did so. Nevertheless, many find it interesting to use the accumulating knowledge across a wide range of disciplines and continue the long tradition of
speculation. The problems of origins, diversification, and spread will no doubt be areas
of research and speculation in the future. As Druehl (1981, quoting Silva 1962) pointed
out, however, “the field of phytogeography is vast, the literature is inexhaustible, its data
capable of a variety of interpretation, extraordinary manipulation, and distortion. It has
the fascination of a chess game. It is a valid, though treacherous, field of investigation.”

HI S TO RY O F R E S E A R CH ( TO 197 0)
If you see beds of weede, take heed of them and keep off from them.
—sailing directions from the mid-1500s cited by Hooker (1847)
The ocean is an inexhaustible treasury of varied wealth, but its riches
are stored in so attenuated a form that we are powerless to gather them
without the aid of natural processes that go on continually. Marine
plants include annually certain portions of this wealth, and offer it for
our acceptance like dividends due; should we refuse, it is returned to
the treasury and, as time advances, offered us again and again.
—Balch (1909)
No level of species’ protection or reserve status will be effective
if water quality, coastal run-off, increased sedimentation, and
contamination impact the ability of giant kelp to survive and thrive.
—Foster and Schiel (2010)

16

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

Giant kelp forests have provided food, medicine, materials, and probably aesthetic value
since the earliest humans inhabited temperate coasts (Dillehay et al. 2008). Forests and
drift plants first entered the written record in the logs of European explorers in the mid1500s. Cabrillo, one of the earliest Spanish explorers in the Northeast Pacific, was apparently the first to mention giant kelp in this region, which he observed while anchored
at Bahía San Pablo in Baja California in 1542 (Kelsey 1986). Other explorers noted giant
kelp in the Southern Ocean at around the same time and commonly used drifting and
attached plants to indicate proximity to land and the presence of shallow, submerged
rocks (Hooker 1847). The presence of “porra,” individuals or rafts of clubbed-shaped
drifting kelp, was especially significant for the Spanish Manila-Acapulco merchant
galleons active between 1565 and 1815. Porra indicated they were near the often fogshrouded west coast of California / Baja California on the eastward leg of their route
and needed to bear south to Acapulco (Schurz 1917). Setchell (1908) noted that porra
could have been Nereocystis luetkeana, Pelagophycus porra, or Macrocystis pyrifera, based
on voyage narratives and depending on where the galleons arrived along the coast. Distributional records and descriptions of new species and forms proliferated as increases
in ocean commerce and voyages of exploration led to more collections and observations.
The resulting taxonomic descriptions, however, were commonly based only on portions
of plants that were often collected as drift. Moreover, the descriptions were usually not
done by the collector but by botanists who saw only the collected portion and not entire
plants growing in the field (Setchell 1932). The early efforts to describe Macrocystis
formally are exemplified by Bauhin (1651) who produced the first written description
and drawing, naming giant kelp BULBUS MARINUS CRINATUS (figure 1.6), and by
Linnaeus’ official description (review in Womersley 1954). Bauhin clearly did not see
an entire plant growing in nature. An even more inaccurate illustration of the plant
appeared in Darwin (1890). To Darwin’s credit, however, he was not responsible for
the illustrations in this 1890 edition of what has become known as the “Voyage of the
Beagle”; most drawings, including that of giant kelp, were done by the illustrator R. T.
Pritchett after Darwin died. Pritchett supposedly made the sketches “on the spot with
Mr. Darwin’s book by his side” (publisher’s prefatory notice to the 1890 illustrated edition), but this is unlikely for the Macrocystis illustration, which looks like a “tribrid” of
the kelps Macrocystis and Lessonia, and the fucalean Marginariella (figure 1.6).
The accuracy of descriptions was greatly improved by Hooker (1847) and Skottsberg
(1907) (figures 1.6B and 1.6C) who spent several years in the Southern Ocean observing and collecting drift and attached plants. Both of these field botanists showed that
much of the morphological variation previously used to describe species was a result
of limited collections of parts of plants. They concluded that the variation previously
used to discriminate between species could often be found as a result of changes in a
single plant during development, within a mature plant, and among plants along environmental gradients. Skottsberg’s (1907) research is particularly noteworthy as he also
accurately described how giant kelp plants developed, and critically reviewed and added

INTRODUCTION TO GIANT KELP FORESTS WORLDWIDE

•

17

A

B

C

D

E

F

figure 1.6
Evolution of giant kelp illustrations. The Skottsberg and Neushul illustrations are anatomically correct
as they show all fronds arise from dichotomous branching (obscured in more fully developed plants)
and that floats and blades occur from the base to the tip of vegetative fronds (see also figure 1.2).
source: Drawings from (A) redrawn from Bauhin (1651), (B) Hooker (1847) (from North 1971a and redrawn
by L. G. Jones), (C) Skottsberg (1907), (D) Darwin (1890) by R. T. Pritchett, (E) and (F) Neushul (adult and
juvenile forms) from Dawson et al. (1960). (B) is reprinted with permission from Schweizerbart Science
Publishing (www.schweizerbart.de).

to the understanding of its internal morphology. This early research was summarized
by Setchell (1932), Womersley (1954), and North (1971a). Setchell (1932) produced the
first world map showing the distribution of the genus. Womersley (1954) reviewed and
more completely described what were thought to be three species based on holdfast
morphology, and mapped the distribution of species worldwide, a map very similar to
the most recent one in figure 1.5.

18

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

As it has for many species, research and research funding increased significantly
when giant kelp became economically important. With the outbreak of World War I,
the U. S. government was concerned over the possible termination of potash supplies
imported from Germany (Cameron 1915). Potash, composed of soluble salts of potassium, can be used as fertilizer as well as in the manufacture of gunpowder and numerous other materials. Potash was traditionally obtained by burning wood or other plant
materials, extracting the soluble potash from the ashes with water and then evaporating
the water. It became more readily available and cheaper with the discovery of large,
subterranean deposits in Germany in 1852 (Neushul 1989). In 1912 and 1913 around
900,000 tons of potash worth about $13,000,000 (in US dollars at the time) were
imported to the United States from German mines, primarily for use as fertilizer on
east coast farms (Cameron 1915). In addition to growing concern over this loss of supply with the onset of war (imports from Germany were embargoed in 1916; Neushul
1989), there was also interest in new supplies for farms on the west coast, and Balch
(1909) had shown that potash could be produced from giant and other large kelps in the
west coast region. In response, the U. S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Soils,
funded several studies of kelp, and particularly giant kelp, beginning in 1911. These
studies included kelp distribution, abundance, and productivity, as well as harvesting
and extraction methods (reviewed in Neushul 1989). Funding continued into the 1920s,
stimulating the giant kelp harvesting and processing industry in southern California.
The information on giant kelp biology appeared in government publications by Cameron (1915) and Brandt (1923) and was summarized along with other U. S. efforts to
develop its own potash supplies by Turrentine (1926).
With the end of World War I and resumption of potash imports from German mines,
it became uneconomical to produce potash and other war-related materials from giant
kelp. Fortunately for the kelp harvesting industry, a relatively new product, alginate,
could be extracted in quantity from giant kelp. Alginate (also referred to as algin or
alginic acid) was discovered in kelp by Stanford (1883). It is a complex cell wall polysaccharide that absorbs water and forms a viscous gum that probably provides strength and
flexibility to the thallus (review in Draget et al. 2005). Alginate in various chemically
modified forms has numerous industrial uses, particularly in the food processing and
pharmaceutical industries. Its extraction from fresh giant kelp sustained the California
harvesting industry and stimulated considerable research through the 20th century.
The potential for harvesting giant kelp as a source of alginate also stimulated growth,
harvesting, and resource assessments in New Zealand (e.g., Moore 1943), Australia
(Cribb 1954), and Canada (Scagel 1947) but given the large size of forests and their
proximity to processing facilities, the alginate industry became centered in southern
California. The California harvest for alginate ended in 2006 as dried kelp that was
collected and processed in other countries became the major source.
The government-sponsored research as well as other studies in the early 1900s
revealed the fundamentals of giant kelp biology and led to harvest management. Detailed

INTRODUCTION TO GIANT KELP FORESTS WORLDWIDE

•

19

maps were made of giant kelp distribution from Pacific Mexico to Puget Sound. Observations indicated that storms could greatly diminish stands and that they recovered in 2–3
years, and field experiments showed that fronds cut by harvesting degenerated but new
fronds grew up from the base of plants to replace them (Crandall 1915). Brandt’s (1923)
extensive field and laboratory work is especially noteworthy. He followed the growth and
survivorship of a cohort of juveniles in the low intertidal zone, confirming Skottsberg’s
(1907) observations on development. Brandt (1923) found it took 3 months for visible sporophytes to develop from spores in the laboratory, and an additional 7 months for juvenile
sporophytes to develop into harvestable adults in the field. Like Crandall (1915), he noted
that storms were a major source of adult mortality but fronds and plants also died during
periods of warm, calm weather. In such conditions, portions of surface fronds turn black, a
phenomenon called “black rot.” The need to manage the California harvest became apparent as many harvesting companies increased the annual harvest to 400,000 wet tons by
1917 (Crandall 1918). The California Legislature gave management authority to the California Department of Fish and Wildlife (until January 1 2013, this was called the California
Department of Fish and Game) which developed a numbering system for the various beds
in southern California, required harvesters to purchase a license ($10.00), and collected a
$0.015 fee per ton of wet kelp harvested. The method, location, and timing of harvests were
also regulated to promote sustainable yields (Crandall 1918).
Other important early studies explored the relationship between giant kelp morphology and physiology and its ability to grow rapidly, and clarified its life history. With
sufficient nutrients, average frond growth rates are in the order of 15 cm day−1 (Zimmerman and Kremer 1984), and the holdfast can grow in the shade of the canopy. These
observations coupled with the presence in the stipe of sieve elements, the specialized
cells morphologically similar to sieve elements in the phloem of terrestrial plants, led
early investigators to speculate that giant and other kelps with similar structures could
actively transport (translocate) the products of photosynthesis within the thallus (e.g.,
Skottsberg 1907). Sargent and Lantrip (1952) showed that translocation was necessary
to support the growth of rapidly growing blades, and Parker (1965) used dye and C14
labeling to demonstrate that the products of photosynthesis were actively transported
through the sieve elements. The life history of giant kelp was first completely determined by Levyns (1933) who showed it to be similar to other genera in the Laminariales
with a large, parenchymatous sporophyte and small, filamentous, free-living male and
female gametophytes. The sporophytes, the large visible structures that were the subject
of almost all early investigations, are therefore only part of the plant if its entire life cycle
is considered; knowledge of the biology and ecology of the gametophytes has become
essential to understanding the dynamics of sporophyte populations.
The first insights into the community ecology of giant kelp forests were published by
Darwin (1839) who was impressed by the diversity and abundance of associated species
and by Skottsberg (1907) who observed that the holdfast “teemed with animal life.” Population studies began with the research of Crandall (1915) and Brandt (1923) discussed

20

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

above. These early observations and studies were necessarily made from the surface,
on plants pulled from the bottom or on intertidal populations at low tide. Giant kelp
forests are most luxuriously developed in the subtidal zone, however, and so progress
in understanding them required a suitable air supply and a warm, flexible diving suit
to enable sustained underwater work. The first in situ research in giant kelp forests was
that of Andrews (1945) who used a diving helmet with air supplied through a hose from
the surface to collect giant kelp holdfasts for identification and enumeration of their
fauna. The difficulties of working easily, efficiently, and safely under water were essentially eliminated by the development of scuba by Cousteau and Gagnan in 1943 (Dugan
1965) and the neoprene wet suit for divers by Bradner in 1951 (Rainey 1998). A few marine
science graduate students in southern California began using scuba soon after the first
“Aqua-Lungs” were imported from France in 1949. The beginnings of the use of scuba
to study kelp forests were largely due to the curiosity and efforts of Conrad Limbaugh
(figure 1.7), a graduate student at Scripps Institution of Oceanography. He developed
training procedures, offered informal training courses, and began the first institutional
marine science diving program at Scripps in 1953 (Dugan 1965, Price 2008).
The use of this new technology in kelp forest ecological research was initially concentrated along the southern California mainland, stimulated by concerns over the effects of
harvesting giant kelp on sport fishing and the effects of sewage discharges on the “health
and sustenance” of kelp forests. Limbaugh (1955) was the first to investigate the effects of
giant kelp harvesting on species other than kelp, providing information on habitat utilization and feeding habits of numerous kelp forest fishes, and the distribution of common
invertebrates. His research included comparing fish assemblages in harvested and nonharvested stands, the first such field experiment in a kelp forest. Aleem (1956) used scuba
to provide the first quantitative description of kelp forest zonation and the standing crop
of algae and invertebrates. The studies of Limbaugh and Aleem were followed by those of
Limbaugh’s colleague Wheeler J. North (figure 1.7). North’s investigations were focused
on kelp harvesting and sewage discharge effects, and done primarily from the perspective of the effects on Macrocystis itself (North 1964, North and Hubbs 1968). North’s early
observations of sea urchin grazing in southern California kelp forests and his suggestion that this might be caused by overharvesting of sea otters (North and Pearse 1970)
stimulated much additional research and controversy over the effects of sea urchins and
their predators on kelp population dynamics (review in Foster and Schiel 2010). Michael
Neushul (figure 1.7), collaborating with North as well as the macroalgal taxonomist E. Y.
Dawson, expanded on Aleem’s (1956) zonation studies with surveys of macroalgal distribution in many giant kelp forests in southern California and northern Baja California
(e.g., Dawson et al. 1960). Neushul also did innovative field and laboratory experiments
to examine giant kelp growth and reproduction (Neushul 1963, Neushul and Haxo 1963).
These early studies provided most of the basic descriptive and life history information
about kelp forests and their associated organisms, and the phenomena that affect their
abundance and distribution in California (summarized in North 1971a).

INTRODUCTION TO GIANT KELP FORESTS WORLDWIDE

•

21

figure 1.7
Some pioneers of giant kelp research.
Top (left to right): Johann Bauhin, Joseph Dalton Hooker, and Carl Skottsberg.
Bottom (left to right): Conrad Limbaugh, Wheeler J. North, and Michael Neushul.
source: Credits: Bauhin (1651); Hooker (Henry Joseph Whitlock © National Portrait Gallery,
London); Skottsberg (1911). Limbaugh and North photos are from Scripps Institution of Oceanography Archives, UC San Diego; Neushul photo by M. S. Foster.

In recent decades, Macrocystis research has expanded geographically and in scope.
Studies in Canada (e.g., Druehl and Breen 1986), Chile (review in Graham, Vásquez,
et al. 2007), New Zealand (Schiel 1990, Schiel et al. 1995, Schiel and Hickford 2001),
the Subantarctic Islands (e.g., Beckley and Branch 1992), Australia (e.g., Ling et al.
2009), and Argentina (Barrales and Lobban 1975) have greatly improved our appreciation of the global differences in giant kelp communities. Furthermore, long-term
programs, such as those of Paul Dayton, Mia Tegner, and colleagues around Point Loma
(San Diego), which have been running since the 1970s, and the Santa Barbara Coastal
LTER (long-term ecological research network of the U. S. National Science Foundation,
begun in 2000) with the work of Principal Investigator Dan Reed and colleagues, have
provided considerable new insights into temporal dynamics, production, dispersal, connectivity, and interactions with the physical environment of kelp forests.

22

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

2
THE STRUCTURE, FUNCTION,
AND ABIOTIC REQUIREMENTS
OF GIANT KELP
The fact that frutification is produced only on the submerged young
bladderless and small fronds, within a few inches of the very root, is highly
remarkable. What then is the function of the floating mass of the plant?
—Hooker (1847)

Macrocystis may be unique among large, community-dominating plants because it is
essentially a “weed.” Within a wide range of environmental conditions and if spores
and suitable rocky substrata are available, Macrocystis can quickly colonize surfaces,
grow rapidly, and become reproductive in less than a year. It does not require facilitation
by other species and, with some local exceptions, its population dynamics are largely
driven by changes in the oceanographic environment. Its biological attributes are therefore particularly relevant to its ecology. To understand how Macrocystis functions within
the environment, it is necessary to consider not only its life history traits but also the
structures and internal processes that allow plants to survive and thrive.
Giant kelp sporophytes are the largest among the kelps and, combined with its relatively complex internal and external morphology, beg comparison to large land plants.
In growth rates, kelps are most like bamboos, which are large grasses, and in ecological
importance they are analogous to forest trees. Unlike its terrestrial analogues, however,
giant kelp has an alternation of generations with free-living, 1N, microscopic gametophytes and 2N sporophytes (figure 2.1). Understanding the biology of giant kelp and its
ecological relationships requires consideration of both of these life stages, which act
almost like two different organisms because of their differing structures, development,
and requirements, and the linkage between them provided by spores and gametes. The
following information unless otherwise noted comes primarily from studies on Macrocystis ‘pyrifera,’ the ecomorph for which we have by far the most information.

23

Apical meristem

Fronds

Apical meristem (Scimitar)
on developing frond
Basal meristem
producing new fronds
7

Sporophylls

copic
Macros pic
o
c
Micros
Zoospores
1
(N)

10

2

8
Young
sporophyte

(2N)

3
4

9
6

Holdfast
composed
of haptera

Adult sporophyte
(2N)

5

figure 2.1
Macrocystis life history and development. The adult sporophyte (2N) illustrated is M. ‘pyrifera.’ Inset
depicts microscopic stages of development from 1N zoospores to multicellular 2N sporophytes.
Illustration at the left shows stylized sporophyte development, with dichotomous growth.
1. Zoospores

6. Female gametophyte with extruded egg to left

2. Settled spore

7. Multicellular male gametophyte with antheridia

3. Developing germ tube

8. Antherozoid (sperm)

4. Germinated gametophyte

9. Fertilization

5. Female gametophyte with oogonium

10. Embryonic sporophyte with rhizoids for attachment

source: Modified from North (1994).

S P O R O P H Y TE S
G R OW T H A ND D E V ELO P M EN T

As a giant kelp sporophyte grows, it undergoes several developmental transitions
(reviewed in North 1994; detailed descriptions of growth and development in the work
of North [1971b], Parker [1971], and Lobban [1978]). Investigators have defined the results
of these transitions in various ways for various reasons (e.g., Dean et al. 1989). We will
distinguish between juveniles and adults, and define juveniles as plants that are visible
to the naked eye but have not yet reached the sea surface. Fronds on adults may all
be beneath the surface in deep water (Perissinotto and McQuaid 1992) or because of

24

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

removal of long fronds by storms. These are distinguished from juveniles either by their
high number of fronds or by their large holdfasts.
Soon after fertilization the embryonic sporophyte develops into a parenchymatous
blade with basal cells that elongate to produce rhizoids. Continued growth and differentiation produces a juvenile sporophyte around 5–10 cm tall with a holdfast composed
of haptera, a stipe (the primary stipe), and a blade (lamina), which are characteristics
of all juvenile Laminariales (figures 1.1 and 2.1). A meristem at the stipe-blade juncture
contributes to further elongation, and a meristoderm (also called meristematic epidermis) near the outer cortex (i.e., the surface) of all parts of the plant contributes to frond
enlargement. As growth continues, the meristem and blade split longitudinally and
form the first dichotomy, also referred to as the primary or basal dichotomy. Continued
dichotomous branching produces more fronds, some of which develop rapidly and can
eventually spread over the sea surface.
Vegetative fronds consist of a branch made up of a central stipe with attached floats
(called pneumatocysts) and blades (lamina). The floats and blades develop as the apical blade, sometimes referred to as the scimitar blade because of its shape, splits into
numerous blades that subsequently develop basal floats and short pedicels arranged
alternately along the frond. Fully developed blades commonly develop undulations and
marginal spines (figure 1.2) that may enhance blade movement, thereby reducing selfshading and enhancing water flow (Hurd and Pilditch 2011) and potentially facilitating
nutrient and carbon uptake (Wheeler 1980a). Skottsberg (1907) suggested the undulations may function to stiffen the blade and thus reduce tearing. Fronds can grow very
rapidly while forming a surface canopy. For example, Clendenning (1971a) found their
maximum elongation rate to be “the fastest autotrophic elongation on record for any
marine or land plant.” He estimated a maximum growth rate of around 50 cm day−1,
with the closest contenders being bamboo and the flower stalks of the century plant,
Agave americana, which came in second and third at 30 and 16 cm day−1, respectively.
However, there clearly is considerable variation in maximal frond elongation rates of
Macrocystis. Zimmerman and Kremer (1984) measured average frond growth rates of
15 cm day−1 at a site in southern California when nutrients were sufficient for growth.
Stewart et al. (2009) examined frond growth for over a year inside and at the edge of a
giant kelp forest near Santa Barbara. Growth rates ranged from 10 to 35 cm day−1 with
highest rates at the edge when the canopy was thick. Other fronds from the dichotomous divisions in the understory grow very slowly until larger fronds senesce or are
otherwise lost, and still others produce the numerous reproductive blades that cluster
near the base of a plant. These blades usually lack floats, divide longitudinally, and
become sporophylls (Neushul 1963, North 1971b).
Haptera production, growth, and attachment to the substratum are critical to sporophyte survival in the often turbulent waters they occupy. As described by Chien (1972,
1973), haptera are first produced at the base of the developing primary stipe. As the
plant grows, haptera continue to be produced up the primary stipe and from stipes of

THE STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND ABIOTIC REQUIREMENTS

•

25

the basal dichotomy, although the exact process depends on plant age and ecomorph
(figures 1.2 and 2.1). Elongation is presumably a result of very active meristoderm at
the tips. Haptera branch dichotomously and are negatively phototactic, growing downward and covering older haptera. The ability of new haptera to attach to older haptera
undoubtedly reinforces the integrity of the entire holdfast. Haptera continue growth
and form an adhesion disc that produces sticky rhizoids when they contact the substratum. Plant attachment is therefore accomplished both chemically by this rhizoidal “glue” composed of secreted polysaccharides and perhaps phenolics (Chien 1973,
Tovey and Moss 1978), and mechanically by haptera growing around objects on the
bottom. North (1994) reported that holdfasts of old Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ plants grew
up to 2 m tall and 3 m in diameter. Furthermore, plant anchoring shows adaptations to
characteristics of sites. For example, holdfasts exceeding 5 m in diameter were found
in stands of giant kelp growing on sand near Santa Barbara, California, prior to the
1983–1984 El Niño (Thompson 1959, North 1971a). These probably established initially on worm tubes (Neushul 1971a) or other hard substrata in the sand, and were
maintained over the years by several plants growing together and several generations
of plants using the original holdfast for recruitment and continued growth (e.g., Schiel
and Foster 1992).
If not removed prematurely by storms or grazers, large vegetative fronds eventually
produce a terminal blade, cease growing, and senesce; individual fronds of M. ‘pyrifera’
usually live no more than 4–9 months (Rodriguez et al. 2013). Although it is commonly
thought that high water motion and low nutrients / high temperatures are a major contributor to frond loss (see Chapter 3), Rodriguez et al. found that senescence and loss of
fronds on plants in the Santa Barbara region are “age-dependent,” controlled by intrinsic
biological processes that result in progressive senescence. Around 50% of the variation
in frond initiation and loss rates could be explained by frond age structure. This phenomenon is similar to that controlling the growth and loss of leaves in many terrestrial
plants, and needs to be considered in studies evaluating the causes of frond dynamics.
Individual plants can live up to 9 years or so (review in Schiel and Foster 2006), but
there is considerable variation in longevity. In southern Chile, for example, Buschmann
et al. (2004) reported that plants in protected populations were annual. Long-term survivorship studies have not been done for the M. ‘integrifolia’ ecomorph, but qualitative
observations suggest it could live much longer than M. ‘pyrifera’ because storms or other
disturbances may remove only part of the stipe-holdfast (rhizome) and the remainder
continues to grow (Brandt 1923). Chien (1973) estimated that an individual hapteron
lived less than 6 months and as the holdfast ages it becomes a core of old, dead haptera
with an outer ring of younger, living haptera (Ghelardi 1971). Taken as a whole, the
persistence of the sporophyte therefore depends on the continual production of new
vegetative fronds as well as new haptera. The quick turnover in biomass of Macrocystis is
therefore quite unlike that of terrestrial trees, where biomass continues to accumulate in
trunks and branches over time. North (1994) estimated a turnover rate of once or twice

26

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

a year, whereas others have estimated rates in central and southern California of 6–7
times annually (Gerard 1976, Reed et al. 2008).
Giant kelp is a large, complex organism, and various metrics are used to describe its
size. One metric is length which, like a fish caught with no witnesses or photographs,
seems to have been exaggerated over time. North (1971a) found that despite rumors
of plants with fronds over 150 m long, the most reliable records of fronds on attached
plants indicate the longest are likely to be around 60 m. This is, of course, a labile characteristic of plants. For example, fronds of plants growing in shallow water are shorter
than those on plants growing in deep water (e.g., North 1971a, Lobban 1978). The biomass of plants is important for estimates of productivity (Chapter 6) and, although labor
intensive, can be estimated by combining measures of plant density, frond abundance
and length, and frond length–weight relationships (Rassweiler et al. 2008). Acquiring
these metrics is compounded by the sheer sizes of some plants. For example, the largest
plant collected from the La Jolla kelp forest in southern California weighed over 400 kg
(Neushul 1959). The most common metric used for a relative measure of plant size is the
number of fronds per plant which, along with frond length and plant density (in numbers per area), can be used to estimate the amount of vegetation in the water column
across a kelp forest. It is also indicative of the degree of shading below the canopy and
carrying capacity (Tegner et al. 1997). North (1971a) estimated plant weights by taking
the average wet weight of M. ‘pyrifera’ fronds on plants, which was around 1.25 kg, and
multiplying by the number of fronds. The largest plant he sampled had 400 fronds and
therefore would weigh 0.5 metric tons. Given the many thousands of Macrocystis plants
that normally inhabit coastal kelp forests, this represents a considerable biomass or
standing stock. This is seen somewhat dramatically in the large amounts of Macrocystis
that wash up on shores after storms, which contribute to onshore and nearshore food
webs and seed colonization of coastal vegetation (figure 2.2).
It is also noteworthy that there is considerable biogeographic variation in kelp frond
and plant sizes, although the degree to which this represents specific site characteristics
or true large-scale differences in growth, survival, and size is unknown. For example,
in a southern New Zealand kelp forest, the maximum elongation rate of fronds was less
than 40 mm day−1, and the maximum life span of fronds was 7 months at one site and
15 months at another (Pirker 2002). These were sheltered sites, however, and affected
by sediment and occasionally poor light quality. Nevertheless, even the largest plants in
most southern New Zealand populations rarely have more than 10 fronds and those in
perennial populations in southern Chile have only 3–4 fronds (Buschmann et al. 2004)
compared to the hundreds of fronds occasionally seen in California populations.

IN T ER N A L A N ATO M Y

The internal morphology of giant kelp rivals the complexity of its exterior and is among
the most highly developed of all the algae. This is perhaps not surprising given the

THE STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND ABIOTIC REQUIREMENTS

•

27

B

A

C

D

figure 2.2
Macrocystis wrack on California beaches. (A) Numerous piles, up to 0.5 m high, scattered along the
shore after a moderate storm. (B) Huge piles, up to several meters deep, in front of the Santa Barbara
Yacht Club after large swells during the 1982–1983 El Niño. (C) Blade on the left consumed by amphipods that then burrowed into the sand (apparently floats are not palatable); fresh blade placed on the
right to illustrate how blade appeared prior to consumption. (D) Embryonic dune formed by a giant
kelp holdfast and colonized by sea rocket (Cakile maritima).
source: Photo (B) courtesy of Ron J. McPeak, UCSB Library Digital Collection; others by M. S. Foster.

development, size, complexity, and turnover rates of the various plant parts which must
function in an environment that can be highly variable over time and with depth. Sykes
(1908) provided the first thorough anatomical description of adult plants, and Parker
(1971) expanded on this (see also Lobban 1978, North 1994). A cross section of a mature
stipe reveals the basic features that occur in a radially symmetrical pattern from edge
to center (figure 2.3): a thin surface cuticle, a pigmented meristoderm, a cortex with
mucilage ducts near its interface with the meristoderm, a zone of sieve elements, and

28

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

A

B
Mat.D MD
Outer Cortex

Cuticle
Meristoderm
Cortex
Medulla

Inner Cortex
Sieve Elements
Medullary Filaments

Cortex
Meristoderm
Cuticle
SC

MD
10 µm

C
IC

D
SE

M

SP

130 µm

20 µm

figure 2.3
Internal morphology of Macrocystis. (A) Cross sections of a blade (top left; about 2 mm thick) and
stipe (top center; about 1 cm diameter; modified from North 1994). (B) Cross section through the
stipe meristoderm and outer cortex with developing mucilage ducts (MD) surrounded by secretory
cells (SC), and mature ducts (Mat.D) above them (scale bar = 10 μm; from Grenville et al. 1982).
(C) Photomicrograph of longitudinal section of stipe with inner cortex (IC), region of sieve elements
(SE) showing sieve plates (SP) and medulla (M) (scale bar = 130 μm; drawn from Parker 1971).
(D) Cross section through sieve elements showing sieve plates (scale bar = 20 μm; modified from
Graham and Wilcox 2000).
source: (B) is reprinted with permission from the Phycological Society of America; (C) is reprinted with
permission from Scweizerbart Science Publishing (www.schweizerbart.de).

the medulla. The meristoderm and outer cortex are composed of parenchymatous,
isodiametric cells, with the meristoderm containing chloroplasts and serving as the
primary photosynthetic tissue. Cells elongate in the inner cortex, and the innermost
cells develop hyphal extensions that produce the fi lamentous medulla. The structure of
the blade is like a flattened stipe but without mucilage ducts, and with sieve elements
among the medullary fi laments (Parker 1971; figure 2.3). Haptera have a meristoderm
and cortex but lack a distinct filamentous medulla. Mucilage ducts are scattered in the

THE STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND ABIOTIC REQUIREMENTS

•

29

cortex (Grenville et al. 1982) and sieve elements are mixed with medullary filaments in
the inner cortex (Parker 1971).
Mucilage ducts are produced when secretory cells derived from the meristoderm separate to form a cavity, a process called schizogamy (figure 2.3). This occurs throughout
the thallus and forms an extensive but sometimes discontinuous longitudinal network
with side connections and cul-de-sacs (Grenville et al. 1982). The mucilage in the ducts
is composed primarily of the sulfated polysaccharide fucoidan but also contains other
polysaccharides and small amounts of fat, all presumably produced by the secretory
cells. Various functions of the duct system and its contents have been proposed (review
in Grenville et al. 1982), but the most likely in giant kelp seems to be for carbohydrate
storage and perhaps osmoregulation. Mucilage may move through the meristoderm to
the surface of the plant. If so, it could also serve to reduce fouling, decrease desiccation
of surface fronds and perhaps reduce hydrodynamic drag.
Like that of phloem in vascular plants, the sieve element translocation system of kelp
integrates plant growth by facilitating the transport of materials from areas where they
are in excess, such as mature surface blades, to areas where they are in short supply,
such as haptera and sporophylls growing in low light near the bottom. Experiments by
Fox (2013) have also shown that when mature frond biomass is removed, transport from
the remaining mature fronds facilitates the growth of new fronds (frond initials) near
the base of the plant. The biomass–frond growth relationship is the basis of the positive relationship between plant biomass and productivity discussed in Chapter 6. This
movement of materials has been called source-sink transport. Sieve elements are found
in the Laminariales and some Fucales but are most developed in the large, rapidly growing giant kelp Macrocystis (Sykes 1908, Parker 1971). The primary longitudinal elements
originate from the outer fi laments of the primary medulla, develop sieve plates with
pores, and together form longitudinal rows called sieve tubes (as sieve elements in figure
2.3C) (Schmitz and Srivastava 1974). Sieve elements are similar to the sieve tube members of vascular plant phloem but lack companion cells. In kelps, stretching produces a
trumpet-like morphology that is widest at the sieve plate, and so these have been called
trumpet hyphae. The primary longitudinal elements are connected through the cortex
to the meristoderm via pits and plasmodesmata so that flow from cell to cell most likely
occurs through the cytoplasm (a process called symplastic; Buggeln et al. 1985). Studies
using radioactive and dye tracers have revealed flow rates in the primary elements of up
to 70 cm hour−1 (Parker 1965). The mechanisms causing flow are not understood well
but appear to involve both an energy-assisted flow and mass flow caused by differences
in osmotic pressure between solute-rich sources and solute-poor sinks (review in Buggeln et al. 1985). The most abundant materials transported are mannitol (around 70% of
materials), amino acids (15%), and inorganic ions (15%; data and review in Manley 1983).
Iodine is especially abundant in plants relative to seawater and may function as an
antioxidant and an antimicrobial agent (Küpper et al. 2008). The surface canopy of giant
kelp is exposed to airborne particles and aerosols, and can rapidly take up and concen-

30

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

trate iodine as well as other radionuclides. Fronds take up radionuclides in the water
column. These attributes make it a natural dosimeter that has been used to detect the
spread of radioactive iodine, 131I, as seen most recently from the damaged Fukashima
nuclear power plant (Manley and Lowe 2012). Sieve sap can also be used as an indicator
of metals associated with coastal runoff (Fink and Manley 2011).

SPORES

Sporophytes in good growing conditions can begin asexual reproduction via sporulation
in less than a year (Neushul 1963, Foster 1975a, Buschmann et al. 2004). Plants can
begin producing spores when they are quite small and, in good growing conditions,
probably when they are only a few months old. The smallest spore-producing plant
found by Neushul (1963) had four fronds that were 1.5–4 m tall. Plants with only 1–2
fronds may become reproductive in southern Chile (M. Graham, pers. comm.). As sporophytes become mature, their sporophylls become darkened with developing sori that
can eventually cover nearly all of both sides of mature, reproductive blades (Neushul
1963; figure 2.4). Sori are dense aggregations of unilocular (i.e., single cell) sporangia
that develop, along with elongate sterile hairs or paraphyses, from the meristoderm of
the sporophylls (Henry and Cole 1982a; figure 2.3). There is one report of sori developing on what are normally vegetative blades (Leal et al. 2014). Macrocystis sori usually
develop from the apex to the base of the sporophylls, and active spore release is indicated
by the somewhat transparent whitish areas on sporophylls from which spores have been
released. As in other Laminariales (review in Fritsch 1945, Neushul 1959, Henry and
Cole 1982a), the nucleus in the developing sporangium produced by the meristoderm in
Macrocystis divides meiotically. The resulting haploid nuclei divide mitotically 2–3 times
and the sporangial contents develop into 16–32 biflagellate haploid spores. These are
sometimes referred to as meiospores because, at least initially, they result from meiosis.
Neushul (1959) saw that spores are not released individually from the sporangium, but
are “ejected” as a group in a transparent packet. The packet ruptures and spores escape
into the surrounding water. The haploid spores have 16 chromosomes (Walker 1952,
Cole 1968) although Yabu and Sanbonsuga (1987) found haploid gametophytes with 32
chromosomes but suggested these were polyploids.
Although the biomass of fertile sporophylls is a relatively small and highly variable
percentage of total plant biomass (from <1% to 10%, Neushul 1963), the small size
of spores and the high density of sporangia on both sides of the sporophylls result in
extremely high fecundity. For example, on a plant with 17 vegetative fronds, Neushul
(1959) measured the area of fertile sori at 2 × 106 mm2 and estimated a sporangium
density of 104 mm−2 of sorus. Assuming that each sporangium contains 32 spores, this
plant bore around 1011 zoospores. This is comparable to the 1012 spores produced by a
single fruiting body of what is thought to be the most prolific fungus, the giant puff
ball Calvata gigantea (Li 2011). It is also an underestimate relative to the life span of the

THE STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND ABIOTIC REQUIREMENTS

•

31

B

A

Cut.
Pa

Sp

50 µm

C
V

N

V

P

V

M
AF

PF

figure 2.4
Sporophyll, sporangia, and spores. (A) Fertile (darker, stippled areas) Macrocystis sporophylls, about
35 cm long (from Neushul 1963). (B) Section through the surface of a typical, fertile Laminariales
sporophyll (from Henry and Cole 1982a). (C) Typical Laminariales spore (stylized). Encircling bands
are cytoskeletal microtubules. Adhesion vesicles around the periphery of the cell not shown, and
flagella are not shown at full length. Spore is about 7 μm long (from Henry and Cole 1982a).
Cut. = cuticle; Pa = sterile paraphysis; Sp = sporangium. AF = anterior flagellum with hairs; V = vesicles
with stored fat; M = mitochondrion; N = nucleus; P = chloroplast; PF = posterior flagellum.
source: (B) and (C) are reprinted with permission from the Psychological Society of America.

sporophyte because mature plants can produce spores year-round as old sporophylls
continue to grow and produce new sori, and new sporophylls are produced (Neushul
1963). Sorus turnover can occur in less than 10 days (Graham 2002). Fecundity is, however, a function of vegetative biomass (Neushul 1963). It decreases as vegetative biomass
is reduced by storms or grazers (Reed 1987, Graham 2002), or by artificially removing
the canopy (Geange 2014), and its recovery can lag behind vegetative recovery (Graham
2002). This relationship, plus the effects of changes in temperature, nutrients, and
water motion, can cause considerable temporal variation in sorus production and spore
release (discussed in Chapter 4). This is particularly true in Chile where there are large
geographic differences in spore production including annual sporophyte populations

32

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

and some perennial Macrocystis ‘integrifolia’ populations that do not produce spores in
autumn (Buschmann et al. 2004).
Planktonic spores, the primary dispersal phase of attached and drifting Macrocystis,
are the beginning of the microscopic stages that link successive generations of sporophytes. These spores are tiny (around 5–7 μm in diameter; Henry and Cole 1982a) but
well equipped for dispersal, settlement, and development into gametophytes (figure 2.4).
As for most Laminariales, giant kelp spores lack a cell wall, are slightly pear-shaped, have
two laterally inserted flagella, a single chloroplast, and storage and adhesion vesicles
(Henry and Cole 1982a). The anterior, forward-directed flagellum (called a flimmer)
provides propulsion and is relatively long with rows of stiff hairs, while the shorter,
trailing, posterior flagellum is smooth (whiplash), an arrangement referred to as heterokont (Henry and Cole 1982a, Graham et al. 2009). Spores are photosynthetic, and
if light is adequate, photosynthesis exceeds respiration even while swimming (Amsler
and Neushul 1991). Storage vesicles in the posterior end of each spore contain lipids that
make up 20–70% of spore carbon. Lipids are used to support metabolic activity in the
dark and during the early development of gametophytes. The presence of low-density
lipids probably reduces sinking rates and so increases time to disperse, and their location
within the spore may cause the spore to tilt downward so that swimming tends to move
the spore toward the bottom (Brzezinski et al. 1993, Reed et al. 1999). The combination of photosynthesis and metabolism of stored lipids enables spores to swim for over
72 hours (Reed et al. 1992). Spore swimming speeds have not been determined for giant
kelp, but assuming they are similar to the maximum of 160 μm sec−1 recorded for Saccharina (=Laminaria) japonica (Fukuhara et al. 2002), spores are very poor swimmers
relative to typical water movement in the nearshore ocean. Their sinking rate of around
1.2 μm sec−1 is also very slow and similar for live and dead spores. At this rate, and from
a release height of 40 cm for the average sporophyll bundle, it would take 100 hours for
them to sink to the bottom in still water (Gaylord et al. 2002) or around 10 hours if they
swam straight down. They do not swim straight down, however, as they are neither phototactic nor geotactic (Henry and Cole 1982a). They are positively chemotactic to a variety
of essential nutrients, but this most likely occurs at very small scales in the benthic
boundary layer (Amsler and Neushul 1989). One can imagine these spores transported
into calm water very near the bottom by water motion, then sinking very slowly with
their anterior end down due to an overall slightly negative buoyancy with less dense fat
in their rear, and finally swimming along a nutrient gradient to suitable microsites on
the bottom. As Reed et al. (1992) pointed out, this behavior near settlement surfaces is
the primary value of spore motility. The anterior flagellum appears to provide the initial
adhesion to the substratum. When contact is made, the flagella are discarded and the
spore attaches with materials from the adhesion vesicles (Henry and Cole 1982a).
Surprisingly, the planktonic phase may be further extended by planktonic gametophytes. It has been shown that if the spores stop swimming in the water column they
can germinate into gametophytes that produce viable sporophytes when settled (Reed et

THE STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND ABIOTIC REQUIREMENTS

•

33

al. 1992). These attributes of spores make longer distance dispersal via water movement
possible, even though spore abundance in the water column and settlement density (measured by sporophyte recruitment) are usually greatest within a few meters of adults plants
within stands (Anderson and North 1966, Reed et al. 1988, Graham 2003). Models of
dispersal (Gaylord et al. 2002) and assessments of sporophyte and gametophyte recruitment at sites well away from possible spore sources (Reed et al. 1988, 2004, Gaylord et al.
2006a, 2006b) indicate planktonic spores and possibly gametophytes can be dispersed
up to a few kilometers. Adult sporophytes can also contribute to dispersal when storms
detach entire plants or plant parts containing sporophylls. Surface drifting “rafts” of
detached giant kelp can survive for over 100 days (Hobday 2000a) and travel hundreds of
kilometers while continuing to produce spores (Macaya et al. 2005, Hernández-Carmona
et al. 2006). Exposure to high irradiance near the surface while dispersing, however, may
reduce spore viability and development (Cie and Edwards 2008).

G AME TO P H Y TE S

Our knowledge of gametophyte biology comes largely from laboratory studies (e.g., Cole
1968) and experiments that outplanted settled spores or gametophytes into the field
on artificial substrata and assessed results as subsequent sporophyte recruitment (e.g.,
Deysher and Dean 1986a). Gametophytes are only a few microns or perhaps tens of
microns in length, although under laboratory conditions that inhibit gametogenesis
they can grow into visible masses of fi laments (e.g., Sanbonsuga and Neushul 1978,
Druehl et al. 2005). Because of their small size and similarity to other fi lamentous
brown algae, there are as yet no techniques to study them directly or reliably in the
field. Outplant experiments and recruitment of sporophytes on substrata placed in the
field (e.g., Foster 1975b, Reed et al. 1997) and in clearings on the bottom (e.g., Reed
and Foster 1984) clearly show that gametophytes occur naturally on hard substrata.
Furthermore, as in some other kelps (Garbary et al. 1999), gametophytes can also occur
as endophytes within other algae.
Settled spores begin to form a cell wall and develop into either male or female gametophytes with a 50:50 sex ratio (Roleda, Morris, et al. 2012a; figure 2.5). Their growth and
reproduction depend on environmental conditions, particularly the requirement of exposure to blue light for gametogenesis (Lüning and Dring 1975, Lüning and Neushul 1978).
As described in detail by Cole (1968) for populations in the Northeast Pacific, if conditions
are optimal, spores developing into female gametophytes produce a “germ tube” through
which most of the spore contents migrate. After migration a cross-wall forms at the distal
end of the germ tube, isolating the single-celled gametophyte. The density of the cytoplasm
increases and the cell enlarges to become pear-shaped and about 35 × 10 μm long as the
gametophyte develops into an oogonium. Each oogonium extrudes an egg, about 18 μm
in diameter that remains attached to the empty oogonium. In less favorable conditions the
female gametophyte may divide to become multicellular. Although not yet determined for

34

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

Female gametophyte
1. Oogonium 2. Extruded 3. Zygote 4. Sporophyte 5. Multicellular females
egg

6. Male gametophyte

7. Antheridia

100 µm
First cell
from spore

Multicellular female gametophyte
(upper) with many developing
sporophytes (lower, arrows) after
fertilization.

8. Laminarian sperm
B
P

N
AF

M

P
PF

CS

CS

figure 2.5
Sexual reproduction in Macrocystis. 1–4: Female gametophyte from the single-cell stage with developing oogonium to the four-cell sporophyte after fertilization. The diameter of the egg is 18 μm.
5: Multicellular female gametophyte (upper) with many developing sporophytes (lower, arrows)
after fertilization. Scale = 100 μm. 6: Multicellular male gametophyte (contents of only one cell are
illustrated). 7: Antheridia (shaded). 8: Diagram of typical Laminariales sperm, about 7 μm long after
release from antheridium.
AF = portion of anterior flagellum with hairs. B = “Type B” vacuoles (function unknown); M = mitochondria; N = nucleus; P = chloroplast; PF = posterior whiplash flagellum; CS = cross sections showing microtubule arrangement.
source: Images 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7 are from Papenfuss (1942), 5 is from Muñoz et al. (2004), and 8 is from
Henry and Cole (1982b) reprinted with permission from the Psychological Society of America.

giant kelp, filamentous gametophytes of some other kelps can survive at least 18 months in
complete darkness (Dieck 1993). These gametophytes or portions of them can produce gametes when returned to optimal conditions in the laboratory (e.g., Sanbonsuga and Neushul
1978, Druehl et al. 2005). It has generally been assumed, based on work in the Northeast
Pacific (e.g., Reed et al. 1988, 1997), that only one oogonium is produced per female, and
females under optimal conditions are only one-celled. Muñoz et al. (2004), however, found
that when female gametophytes from Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ populations in southern Chile
are grown under optimal conditions they produce extensive, branched, multicellular filaments with multiple oogonia and, after fertilization, multiple sporophytes (figure 2.5).
Male gametophytes follow a similar path from spore settlement to first gametophyte
cell but then, similar to female gametophytes from southern Chile, divide to produce a
multicellular, branched filament before producing antheridia (figure 2.5). The filamentous gametophytes can be distinguished by filament diameter, with males roughly half
the size of females (about 5 μm vs. 10 μm; Lüning and Neushul 1978). This difference in
size can be used to differentiate pre-reproductive males from females for hybridization
experiments (e.g., Sanbonsuga and Neushul 1978). Antheridia can develop from cells
within or at the tips of filaments, and each releases a single sperm. The cell that divides to
form an antheridium can also become an antheridium, producing two sperm (Cole 1968).
In optimal laboratory conditions, gametophytes of both sexes can become fertile in about
2 weeks (Cole 1968, Lüning and Neushul 1978). As for female gametophytes, fi lamentous
male gametophytes under suitable conditions in the laboratory can be maintained in a
nonreproductive, perennial state and portions removed and induced to become reproductive. One- to two-celled gametophytes maintained in a nonreproductive condition for at
least 7 months can also be induced to become reproductive (Carney 2011). The degree
to which such delayed development of gametophytes or small sporophytes (Kinlan et al.
2003) contributes to sporophyte recruitment in the field is discussed later (Chapter 4).
One of the most significant discoveries concerning reproduction in kelps is that when
the egg is extruded from the oogonium it releases a pheromone that causes the sperm to
be ejected from antheridia and chemotactically swim toward the egg (Lüning and Müller
1978, review in Müller et al. 1985; figure 2.6). The pheromone lamoxirene is effective at
concentrations as low as 1 × 10 −11 M. Released sperm are biflagellate and pear-shaped,
and similar in size and structure to spores (figure 2.5). They differ from spores in lacking
adhesion vesicles but having a much longer, tapered anterior flagellum (Henry and Cole
1982b). Sperm possess chloroplasts, but their photosynthetic and swimming abilities,
and longevity, are currently unknown. While the pheromone enhances the chances of
fertilization and is active at extremely low concentrations, its dilution in the ocean is no
doubt considerable, suggesting that male and female gametophytes need to be in very
close proximity for fertilization to be successful. This may be facilitated by aggregation
of settling spores associated with the hydrodynamic effects of variation in substratum
rugosity at scales of centimeters to millimeters (Foster 1975a, Muth 2012). Müller (1981)
suggested the pheromone was not effective beyond around 0.5 mm.

36

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

0
200 µm

1

2

3

figure 2.6
Sperm release induced by lamoxirene. The pheromone was absorbed on a SiO2 sphere and the sequence

8

photographed at 1 min intervals. The sphere can be seen
in 1 and the increasing cloud of swimming sperm in 2,
3, and 8. The experiment was done with the kelp Alaria
esculenta, but results would be similar with Macrocystis.
source: From Müller (1988) reprinted with permission
from © Cambridge University Press.

In a series of innovative field experiments, Reed (1990a) outplanted natural substrata
seeded with Macrocystis spores at different densities and assessed fertilization success by
determining sporophyte recruitment. He found that a density of at least 1 spore mm−2 was
necessary for successful recruitment, surmising that fertilization distance was critical.
Given the dilution effect on spore density with distance from source plants, it appears from
this requirement alone that the vast number of spores produced is necessary to maintain
populations. Giant kelp sporophytes can develop parthenogenetically from female gametophytes (Druehl et al. 2005). Macrocystis is also self-fertile and self-fertilization is likely,
especially if spore dispersal is limited (Gaylord et al. 2006a, 2006b). However, Raimondi
et al. (2004) found that sporophytes produced from self-fertilization suffered severe
reductions in fitness with much reduced sporophyll production and fecundity. They suggested this might be a cause of the periodic decline of populations on isolated reefs and
areas with slow currents where dispersal is limited and self-fertilization is therefore more
likely. The benefits of outbreeding have also been shown by crosses between plants from
different populations along the Chilean coast (Westermeier et al. 2011).

B A S I C A B I OT I C R E Q U I R E ME NT S

Interest in understanding the biology and ecology of giant kelp has led to considerable
research on the physical and chemical requirements and their amounts or levels needed
for growth and reproduction. For marine plants, the requirements are suitable levels of
temperature and salinity, amounts of light at particular wavelengths, and composition

THE STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND ABIOTIC REQUIREMENTS

•

37

Stage
Sporophytes
Juvenile
Adult
Spores
Gametophytes

table 2.1

Abiotic requirements of Macrocystis.

Salinity
(‰)

Temperature (°C)

>22b
<43g
25–35i

0–20c
8–23d
ND
−1.5–26j
10–17 k

Nitrate
(μmol L −1)

Light
(PAR 400–700 nm)a

>1e

2–3 mol m−2 day−1 f

ND
>1l

90 μmol m−2 sec−1 h
~0.4 mol m−2 day−1 m

a. PAR = photosynthetically active radiation. Surface PAR in southern California is ~20–60 mol m−2 day−1 (Dean 1985).
b. Lower salinity tolerance. May be a temperature–salinity interaction (Druehl 1978, Buschmann et al. 2004).
c. Lowest and highest surface temperatures based on total geographic range (Setchell 1932).
d. Range of surface temperatures for field populations in Chile (Buschmann et al. 2004, Vásquez et al. 2006).
e. Varies due to interaction between temperature and nutrients (Zimmerman and Kremer 1984).
f. Saturation of photosynthesis in field experiments. Data and review in Dean and Jacobson (1984, 1986).
g. Upper salinity tolerance for germination and germ tube formation (Bay and Greenstein 1993).
h. Saturation of photosynthesis in the laboratory (Amsler and Neushul 1991).
i. For gametogenesis (Sanbonsuga and Neushul 1978).
j. Tolerance limits for survival (Dieck 1993).
k. Optimal temperature range for female gametogenesis (Lüning and Neushul 1978).
l. Likely given data in Deysher and Dean (1986a).
m. For ~100% fertility in the laboratory at 12:12 photoperiod (Deysher and Dean 1984). Greater than 0.4 mol m −2
day−1 required for sporophyte production in the field (Deysher and Dean 1986a). Light requirements affected by temperature and nutrients. In addition to or as part of PAR, gametophytes require 260 μmol cm −2 of blue light (360–
500 nm) for gametogenesis (Lüning and Neushul 1978). This requirement is affected by the rate quanta are received
(Deysher and Dean 1984).

and amounts of nutrients. The available data, summarized by life history stage, are
presented in Table 2.1. Correlations between distribution and temperature suggest Macrocystis sporophytes do not survive well in very cold or very warm waters. Gametophytes
in the laboratory can survive at higher and lower temperatures than those associated
with sporophyte distribution, but optimal temperatures for reproduction are narrower.
Correlations from natural distributions of sporophytes and lab experiments with gametophytes indicate that neither stage is tolerant of low salinities. Tolerance to high salinities has become of recent interest because of the potential effects of coastal desalination
plants that discharge highly saline brine into nearshore habitats.
As might be expected given their different habitats and sizes, light requirements
differ among stages of giant kelp. Gametophytes living on the bottom can grow and
reproduce in very low light, about 1% of surface irradiance at 400–700 nm (as moles
of photosynthetically active radiation in Table 2.1). This is in agreement with Lüning’s
(1981) conclusion that kelps generally require at least 1% of surface illumination. Gametophytes also require a particular amount of blue light to become fertile (Table 2.1). In

38

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

table 2.2

Known nutrient requirements for Macrocystis.

Elementsa

Form normally used by plantsb

Limiting in naturec

Carbon
Oxygen
Nitrogen
Phosphorus
Manganese
Iron
Cobalt
Copper
Zinc
Molybdenum
Iodine

HCO3−, CO3 =
O2
NO3−, NH4 +
PO4 ≡
–
Likely colloidal
–
–
–
–
–

No
No
Sometimes
Maybe
Maybed
Maybe
Nod
Maybee
Maybee
No
No

a. Kwabara and North (1980).
b. Where forms are not given (–), it is assumed that the element is used as a free ion.
c. DeBoer (1981).
d. May limit growth in deep oceanic water (Kuwabara 1982).
e. Toxic as free ions in deep oceanic water (Kuwabara 1982).

contrast, juvenile and adult sporophytes require an order of magnitude more light to
saturate photosynthesis although this can vary because the light required to saturate
adult blades varies with their age and position in the water column (Wheeler 1980b).
The amount of light required for the growth of embryonic sporophytes from a few cells
to distromatic blades on the order of several millimeters tall is similar to that for gametophytes, but the embryonic sporophytes can grow under a wider temperature range and
are not inhibited by high light intensities (Fain and Murray 1982).
Few macroalgae have been grown in defined culture media in axenic conditions, so
little is known about their complete nutritional requirements. The assumption is that
their inorganic requirements are similar to those of terrestrial plants (DeBoer 1981).
North (1980) identified 38 elements in Macrocystis tissue, and Kuwabara and North
(1980) found that at least nine elements were essential for the growth and reproduction
of microscopic stages (11 including carbon and oxygen; Table 2.2). DeBoer (1981) suggested that of these, nitrogen, phosphorus, iron, and perhaps manganese and zinc may
possibly limit macroalgal growth in nature. North (1980) suggested that copper may
also be limiting for giant kelp. Much of the interest in nutrient limitation came from
attempts to farm giant kelp using deep ocean water. In this un-natural circumstance,
Kuwabara (1982) suggested that several nutrients could be limiting (Table 2.2). In nearshore waters where giant kelp grows naturally, however, only nitrate has been identified
as limiting in some regions. Field correlations (e.g., Jackson 1977, Zimmerman and
Kremer 1984) and lab and field experiments (e.g., Deysher and Dean 1986a, 1986b)

THE STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND ABIOTIC REQUIREMENTS

•

39

in southern California have clearly shown that sporophyte recruitment declines and
sporophytes begin to deteriorate if nitrate falls below 1 μmol L −1 (Table 2.1). Giant kelp
is particularly sensitive to low nitrate because its storage capacity for this nutrient is only
a few weeks (Gerard 1982a, Zimmerman and Kremer 1986).
These abiotic requirements provide a general guide to interpreting variation in Macrocystis populations in nature. Taken together, the life history traits, morphology, internal structure, and abiotic requirements of giant kelp set its course in the complex sea of
abiotic and ecological influences that constrain or enhance the success of individuals.
These characteristics are manifested in the demography of the Macrocystis in different
environments, its responses to abiotic factors and its role in ecologically complex kelp
forests. We address this complexity in later chapters.

40

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

3
THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT
Nor can these variations excite surprise, when it is considered that this gigantic
weed is subject to every vicissitude of climate, of temperature, and exposure;
that it literally ranges from the Antarctic to the Arctic circle; through 120
degrees of latitude; that it lives and flourishes, whether floating or attached,
growing in bays, harbours, or the open sea when most distant from land; and,
lastly, that it equally adapts itself to the calmest or most tempestuous
conditions, to waters of uniform depths or those which rise and sink with the
tide, to dead water or to strong currents.
—Hooker (1847)

Environmental factors involved in seaweed ecology—light, nutrients, water
motion, and temperature—have similar stratified distributions. As a result, it is
difficult to determine which are the key factors. But it is easy to find a
relationship of any one with algal distribution.
—Jackson (1977)

THE K E LP E NVIR O NME NT

The nonbiological environment defines the “fundamental niche” space occupied by
giant kelp. This includes the physical and chemical conditions that allow Macrocystis
settlement, growth, reproduction, primary production, and biomass accumulation.
These include the abiotic requirements for growth and reproduction as well as suitable
substratum characteristics and water motion regimes, and their temporal and spatial
variability. Of course, these factors rarely act separately, are often correlated with each
other, and interact with one or more life stages of kelp. All species, however, occur
within a climate envelope of multiple physical conditions that affect their growth,
reproduction, recruitment, and survival. For marine algae, these conditions may differentially affect one or more life history stages that dictate whether or not a species will
flourish and form populations. These conditions apply across wide geographic scales,
among regional sites, and down depth gradients, and vary considerably over time. It is
hardly surprising, therefore, that we are still gaining significant new insights into how

41

Macrocystis responds to the abiotic environment and the long-term consequences of
oceanic events such as El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO), the Pacific Decadal Oscillation, and climate change.
The remarkable success of giant kelp ecologically and biogeographically is reflected
in the extremely wide range of physical conditions in which it occurs. Delineating these
conditions, however, has become a more expansive task over recent years following the
genetic analyses of Coyer et al. (2001) and the taxonomic unification of Demes et al.
(2009), who designated all species of Macrocystis as the single species Macrocystis pyrifera. Although the debate about the number of species goes back at least to Hooker (1847;
see introductory quote for taxonomic classification), the recent consolidation into a single species means that earlier descriptions of the biogeographic and ecological limits of
M. pyrifera and the conditions that bounded it (cf. Foster and Schiel 1985) need revision
to accommodate what are now considered as ecomorphs or ecotypes.
With few exceptions, Macrocystis requires a hard substratum for settlement and
attachment, water temperatures between about 4°C and 20°C, sea-bottom light intensities equivalent to 1% or greater than sea-surface irradiance, nitrate concentrations
>1 μmol L −1, oceanic salinities, and protection from extreme water motion. Obviously,
almost all of its biogeographic range falls within these categories, but perhaps a more
interesting question is why its range is limited in some places where these conditions
seem to apply. For example, Macrocystis occupies much of the Pacific coast of California
and Baja California, Mexico. To the south, it may be restricted by waters that are too
warm or too low in nutrients (see sections below). To the north, Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’
ends in central California, primarily due to severe water motion (Foster and Schiel
1985, Graham 1997) and perhaps competition with the surface canopy kelp Nereocystis
luetkeana, although another ecomorph (M. ‘integrifolia’) occurs through British Columbia to Alaska. Giant kelp forests flourish and are particularly well developed on outer
coasts between depths of around 5 m (which is usually outside the often intense swell
conditions inshore) and 20 m, beyond which sea-bottom light is often too attenuated
for effective recruitment and growth. Its presence along the coastlines of the extremely
exposed subantarctic islands and outer coasts of Chile is usually restricted to areas
behind headlands and in more sheltered bays outside of the full force of oceanic swells
and storms (Villouta and Santelices 1984, Attwood et al. 1991).
Macrocystis is usually absent from estuaries and far inside of protected bays. This
is most likely because of a shortage of rocky substrata, increased sedimentation, and
reduced light. Reduced salinity can also restrict Macrocystis in bays and other areas with
large freshwater inputs (Table 2.1). North (1969), for example, reported severe damage
to adult giant kelp transplanted to Newport Bay, California (near Los Angeles) when
salinity was lowered to 10 ppt during a storm.
In this chapter, we expand on these general characteristics and discuss their effects
on Macrocystis and their variability.

42

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

S U B S TR AT UM AND S E D IME NTATI O N

Macrocystis spores are capable of settling and developing on just about any substratum,
but, with few exceptions, giant kelp forests and the sessile communities associated with
them require hard substratum to develop and persist. If these plants and animals do
manage to attach and grow on sand, sediment, or shell debris, they are usually swept
away in all but the calmest conditions. In this sense, therefore, there is an interaction
between the physical factors of substratum type and water motion which affects the
presence of kelp forests. Even in areas with massive rock for attachment, the hardness and friability of the rock may affect the survival of giant and other kelps during
storms (Foster 1982). Some areas with limited rocky substrata, however, can support
kelp forests. For example, between Oceanside and Del Mar, southern California (near
San Diego), there are extensive but patchy areas of small boulders and cobble with a
Macrocystis community (Schroeter et al. 1993). During storms, the drag on Macrocystis
and other kelps is sufficient to dislodge plants, sometimes with their anchoring cobbles
and small rocks still attached. These occasionally are moved within the kelp forest or
transported to the beach or deeper water. There is also the case of kelp forests along 40
km of coast between Goleta and Gaviota north of Santa Barbara, California. Kelp forests
in this region grew mostly on sand and were removed by the large El Niño storms of
1982–1983 (Foster and Schiel 1985, Schiel and Foster 1992). The kelp may have initially
recruited to surfaces such as shells and worm tubes. Once established, the sand-fi lled
holdfasts of very large plants probably acted as recruitment centers for subsequent generations (see Chapter 2, sporophytes). Once removed, there was no effective way for
further recruitment. Numerous attempts to re-establish this bed proved unsuccessful
(Foster and Schiel 1993) and only remnants attached to isolated rocky substrata along
this coastline remain today. A few populations elsewhere also occur completely unattached (data and review in Gerard and Kirkman 1984), most likely sustained by the
input of drifting fronds from other areas with attached plants. The vast majority of giant
kelp forests worldwide, however, occur as attached plants on rocky substrata. The depth
restriction of rocky reef in some areas, such as many of the fringing reefs of southern
New Zealand where hard reef goes to sand at around 20–25 m depth, confines giant
kelp to a relatively narrow band along the coastline (Schiel 1988, 1990, Schiel et al. 1995,
Schiel and Hickford 2001).
Sediments also affect giant kelp forests and their associated species through scour
and burial of rocky substrata (Weaver 1977, Reed et al. 2008) and recruitment inhibition
(Devinny and Volse 1978, Carney et al. 2005). North (1971b) suggested that Macrocystis
fronds are particularly susceptible to damage if covered with sediment, and Foster et
al. (1983) concluded that changes in sediment cover could be responsible for some of
the historical changes in the areal extent of kelp forests around San Onofre. Johnson
(1980) recounted observations, made in the late 1800s on San Miguel Island (one of the
Channel Islands of southern California), that kelp forests were destroyed by sand eroded

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

43

MER SS (MT X 1000 year–1)

5

180

Kelp canopy (km²)

4
120
3

2
60
1

0
1938

1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

MER SS (MT X 1000 year–1)

Kelp canopy km²

0
2008

Year
figure 3.1
Palo Verdes, California, giant kelp canopy area and mass emission rates (MER) of suspended
solids (SS) from ocean sewage discharges near this forest.
MT = metric ton.
source: Figure and data sourced from J. Gully, Los Angeles County Sanitation District, and Foster and
Schiel (2010).

from the land. Reed et al. (2008) found that 80% of the rocky habitat at one of their sites
was buried by sand during a storm, preventing the recovery of Macrocystis for at least
4 years. Kelp abundance, including that of giant kelp, is also reduced in areas affected by
sediment plumes from landslides (Konar and Roberts 1996). Within kelp forests, Grigg
(1975) listed burial as an important cause of mortality of Muricea californica, a gorgonian
coral commonly found on reefs and in kelp forests south of Point Conception (central
California). Burial can also kill young hydrocorals (Stylaster californicus) (Ostarello 1973)
and other sessile animals (Weaver 1977), and may kill slow-moving invertebrates. Sediments can clog the fi lter-feeding apparatus of suspension-feeding invertebrates, and
may be partly responsible for the generally higher abundances of fi lter feeders such as
Stylaster on vertical surfaces where sedimentation is reduced (Ostarello 1973). A mosaic
of sediment / sand and rock patches is common in kelp forests, and this pattern may
change, particularly during storms. Small patches of shifting sediment are one disturbance that kills established organisms and creates space for recolonization. Such disturbances may therefore have significant effects on abundance and diversity of species
within some kelp forests (Rosenthal et al. 1974, Foster 1975b, Grigg 1975).
A recent analysis of historical data concluded that the disappearance of large tracts
of giant kelp near San Diego and Los Angeles in the 1950s was most likely due to sedimentation from postwar urban expansion and the vast amount of flocculent material

44

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

discharged from sewage treatment plants into nearshore kelp forests. Foster and Schiel
(2010) showed there was an inverse correlation between the amount of this material and
the abundance of kelp (figure 3.1). It is known from laboratory experiments that even
small amounts of sediment can greatly inhibit the attachment and growth of Macrocystis
spores (Devinny and Volse 1978), a result similar to that of other large brown algae (e.g.,
Taylor and Schiel 2003, Deiman et al. 2012). Effects can occur both through inhibition of attachment to a stable substratum and through light inhibition if even a little
sediment covers spores or developing microscopic algal stages. A finding by Dean et al.
(1983), that sedimentation rates are negatively correlated with sporophyte recruitment,
seems to be a general phenomenon. It is also highly probable that the small stages of
many other algae and invertebrates in a kelp forest are negatively affected in this way.

TE MPE R AT U R E

The general correspondence between seawater temperature and kelp distribution geographically has long been known. Setchell (1893) wrote that “it is temperature that limits
the distribution of the kelps and that too, the summer temperature, as heat not cold
is inimical to their growth.” In examining the geographic distribution of 17 benthic
algal species, van den Hoek (1982) concluded that critical temperatures limited essential events in their life histories. For temperate species, he proposed six boundaries: a
northern lethal boundary, beyond which a species cannot survive; a northern growth
boundary, corresponding to the lowest summer temperature that permits sufficient
growth; a northern reproductive boundary, the lowest summer temperature at which
reproduction can occur; and their corresponding southern boundaries. His scheme,
therefore, recognizes the critical interaction of temperature with life history stages and
the demographic traits of growth, reproduction, and survival. As pointed out by Jackson (1977) and a review by Wheeler and Neushul (1981), however, temperature and
other key abiotic factors are often highly correlated, which complicates any discussion of
them separately. Of most importance for kelp forests and kelp productivity is the inverse
relationship between temperature and nutrients (Jackson 1977) and its most important form for kelp growth, nitrate (Zimmerman and Kremer 1984, Zimmerman and
Robertson 1985; see figure 3.2). These relationships are best known for the west coast
of North America where strong seasonal upwelling occurs. Cross-correlation between
environmental variables can also occur because of intermediate causal relationships.
For example, low water temperatures and high nutrients can lead to phytoplankton
blooms in surface waters, thereby attenuating light to benthic areas (Quast 1971a, Clendenning 1971b). On much larger spatial and temporal scales, ENSO events are associated
with correlative changes in temperature, nutrients, severe water motion through storm
activity, and alteration of the light environment because of the loss of canopy species,
which together have caused the largest changes in giant kelp forests seen over the past
century (e.g., Graham et al. 1997, Dayton et al. 1999, Parnell et al. 2010).

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

45

18

15
1981
Nitrate (µmol L¯¹)

12

1983

9

6

3

0
10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

Temperature (°C)
figure 3.2
Scatterplot of the temperature–nitrate relationship during 1981 and 1983 at Catalina Island, southern
California. Although there was no difference in slopes for the temperature–NO3 relationship below
15°C between 1981 and 1983, the Y-intercept was significantly lower during 1983.
source: From Zimmerman and Robertson (1985).

The interaction between temperature and other physical factors has long been suggested (Druehl 1978) or demonstrated to be important for many kelps (e.g., Lüning and
Neushul 1978, Dean et al. 1983). Some of these differences relate to latitudinal trends in
species’ occurrences and performance. For example, monthly mean surface temperatures of nearshore waters within the western north Pacific distribution of large stands
of Macrocystis pyrifera vary from around 11–17° C in central California to around 15–26°C
in Baja California, Mexico (Sverdrup et al. 1942, Edwards and Estes 2006). Edwards
and Estes (2006) found, for example, that sea-surface temperature (SST) in some areas
of central California exceeded 16°C for less than two weeks during summer 1997, but
temperatures were greater than this for nearly a full year (April 1997 to March 1998)
in coastal waters of southern California and Baja California. It is generally thought that
adult giant kelp do not grow well above 20°C, but those in Baja California can experience
temperatures beyond this for several weeks (North 1971a, Ladah et al. 1999, Edwards
and Estes 2006) as can populations in northern Chile (Vásquez et al. 2006). The Baja
populations are known to come and go, particularly around El Niño years, and their

46

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

presence is probably an exception when cool water is upwelled (Dawson 1951, Edwards
and Estes 2006). The deterioration of sea-surface canopies and sometimes entire plants,
however, is undoubtedly due to the combined effects of thermal stress and severely
depressed nutrients (see sections that follow). Zimmerman and Kremer (1986) found,
for example, that Macrocystis frond elongation rates declined with increasing temperature (see figure 3.3A). They found no effect of temperature on growth between around
14.5°C and 18.5°C, and then a decline up to 21°C. However, they attributed this effect
mostly to nutrient depletion at higher temperatures.
There may also be localized adaptations that allow warm-water populations to withstand higher temperatures, at least for short periods, although as discussed below (in the
“Nutrients” section), since temperature and nitrate can be inversely correlated it is not
always clear which factor is the cause of algal responses. North (1971a) found that sporophytes transplanted from Baja California, Mexico, to Newport Bay in southern California survived better during periods of warm water than did local plants. This may have
been due to ecotypic differences in the ability to grow at low nitrate concentrations, as
Kopczak et al. (1991) found in laboratory growth experiments using plants from regions
with different temperature / nutrient regimes. This type of effect can also be manifested
in latitudinal trends. For example, Oppliger et al. (2012) found a latitudinal difference in
response to temperature of two “cryptic” variants of the kelp Lessonia nigrescens in Chile.
The northern variant occurs from 16° S to 30° S latitude and the southern variant from
29° S to 40° S, and they appear to be reproductively isolated on a local scale (Tellier et al.
2009). The southern cold-water variant was unable to reproduce and survive at higher
temperatures (ca. 20°C), whereas the northern variant could. Many other taxa show a
latitudinal trend related to temperature (e.g., Peters and Breeman 1993). Similarly, the
physiological performance of rafting Macrocystis declined from the south to the north
along the Chilean coast, an effect largely ascribed to increased temperature (Rothäusler
et al. 2011). This effect was compounded by the reduced length of blades, which underwent a loss of pigments possibly due to increased ultraviolet radiation, and increased
cover of epibionts, particularly bryozoans, in warmer waters.
Besides the interaction of physical factors, another troublesome feature of assessing
temperature effects is its measurement in natural conditions. The most common way of
assessing temperature is now through satellite-derived data of the sea surface. However,
this measurement of temperature may not truly reflect what an organism experiences in
the field, especially when all its life stages are considered. In the case of Macrocystis, the
requirements for the 1N stages are on the benthos and not in the water column or on the
sea surface. The water column is often thermally stratified so that SST can be five or so
degrees higher than on the bottom (Zimmerman and Kremer 1984). Furthermore, temperatures at the bottom of kelp forests can vary by 4–8°C in less than a day (Quast 1971a,
Barilotti and Silverthorne 1972, Zimmerman and Kremer 1984). Rosenthal et al. (1974)
found mean and maximum surface temperatures near their study area by San Diego,
California, over a 5-year period to be 16.3°C and 24.6°C, respectively, whereas the mean

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

47

15

Frond Elongation Rate (cm day¯¹)

A

10

5

0
14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

Temperature (°C)
B

Frond Elongation Rate (cm day¯¹)

15

10

5

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Avg Nitrate Concentration (µmol L¯¹ )
figure 3.3
Frond elongation of Macrocystis in southern California as a function of temperature (A) and
average ambient nitrate concentration (B).
source: From Zimmerman and Kremer (1986).

10

at 17 m was 13.0°C and the maximum 16°C. As expected, the thermocline is most pronounced in summer and often disappears over winter. Zimmerman and Kremer (1984)
found, for example, that seasonal temperatures above the thermocline ranged from 15°C
during winter to 20°C during summer, but below the thermocline they were more stable
temporally, ranging between 12°C and 15°C seasonally. Furthermore, their thermistor
profile data showed there was great variability, even over the course of a day, and especially so in summer when there were incursions of cold, nitrate-rich water that were more
frequent with increasing depth. These were linked to the semidiurnal internal tides,
which can push these isotherms upward by as much as 20 m in 2–3 hours (Armstrong
and LaFond 1966, Zimmerman and Kremer 1984, Zimmerman and Robertson 1985).
Temperature has also been suggested as being important in the geographic distribution of kelp forest fishes and invertebrates (Quast 1971b, Gerrodette 1979). As for bull
kelp (Nereocystis luetkeana) and gorgonian corals, major changes in the distribution of
kelp forest species occur near Point Conception where the California Current moves offshore, creating large changes in temperature within a short distance. Briggs (1974) also
emphasized the importance of these changes near Point Conception in his review of
marine biogeography. Similar breakpoints for many taxa are seen around 30° S latitude
in Chile, the tip of South Africa, and Cook Strait in central New Zealand (Blanchette
et al. 2009). Mechanistic understanding of these transition zones on species’ distributions inevitably involves a combination of effects due to temperature, nutrients, and
changes of currents, including effects on larval dispersal.
LI GHT
It is very difficult to define a critical depth—or depth range—below which
photosynthesis will be controlled by light, but it is fairly certain that,
wherever suitable substrate is available, the maximum depth at which
benthic plants grow will be determined by the prevailing light climate.
—Dring (1981)

The light environment of kelp forests is complex across all spatial and temporal scales
because of seasonal differences in light quality and angle of incidence, the influences
of suspended sediments, phytoplankton blooms, shading by algal canopies, and a wide
range of disturbances that can alter all of these. Both light quantity and light spectra
are attenuated through the water column so that benthic organisms experience a far
different light environment than those in the water column or on the sea surface. The
methods and instrumentation used to measure light relative to the biology of kelp forest
organisms took great strides in the 1970s (reviewed by Lüning 1981) and continue to this
day with the availability of small and relatively inexpensive sensors capable of measuring quanta and different wavelengths, which are most relevant to algal requirements.
Most modern measurements of irradiance in algal research are of photosynthetically
active radiation (PAR) as photon flux density, which is particularly appropriate for plants

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

49

because photosynthesis is a quantum process, in units of einsteins or moles per area per
time, where 1 E = 1 mol = 6.02 × 1023 photons.
A diverse array of light-absorbing pigments enables marine algae to use wavelengths
between 400 and 700 nm (PAR) for photosynthesis (Haxo and Blinks 1950, Dring
1981), although other plant processes such as gametogenesis in kelps are sensitive to
light outside this range (Lüning 1981). The amount of PAR required for growth varies
among taxa and roughly relates to their pigmentation (Dring 1981). Most seaweeds in
a kelp forest start life on the bottom, and light, as well as other factors affecting plant
growth, must be suitable there. In the absence of other possible controlling factors,
such as inadequate substratum or impacts of grazers, the lower depth limit of giant
kelp and, therefore, giant kelp forests, is almost certainly determined by light. Lüning
(1981) suggested that for most kelps, this limit will occur where irradiance is reduced
to about 1% of that above the sea surface. Giant kelp generally grows deeper in clearer
water, as seen in some central California kelp forests where depth distributions are
broadly correlated with water clarity (Foster 1982, Spalding et al. 2003). On the negative
side, there is at least anecdotal evidence that urbanization and coastal development have
attenuated the depth distribution of some giant kelp forests, such as the outer, deeper
margin of the Point Loma kelp forest (near San Diego) that has receded to shallower
depths over several decades, probably due to increased turbidity (cf. Foster and Schiel
2010). On the positive side, even where inshore forests may by restricted in depth, deep
kelp forests frequently occur in clear waters along relatively undeveloped coastlines or
further out from the immediate coastal zone. For example, remotely operated vehicle
(ROV) surveys by Spalding et al. (2003) found that giant kelp occurred as deep as 35 m
in central California. The record depth for Macrocystis appears to be the 68 m found by
Perissinotto and McQuaid (1992) at the Prince Edward Islands off South Africa. This
was Macrocystis ‘laevis,’ which grew to around 25 m in length and never extended to
the sea surface. They estimated that M. ‘laevis’ at 60 m depth received a photon flux of
around 0.29–0.43 μmol m−2 day−1, which is just above the thresholds for gametophyte
growth and sporophyte formation (Table 2.1).
An exciting discovery related to this is the relatively common occurrence of deepwater kelp populations in the tropical zone. Graham, Kinlan, et al. (2007) used a “synthetic oceanographic and ecophysiological model” to predict the location of tropical kelp
forests, and postulated a deep-water refuge for kelps. Using this model, they predicted
that the kelps Eisenia galapagensis, Laminaria brasiliensis, and L. abyssalis would occur as
deep as 200 m and that they would be far more common across the tropical zone than
had previously been supposed. They verified that E. galapagensis occurs at least to 60
m depth off the Galapagos shoreline. They speculated that genera with vicariant and
disjoint distributions, such as Laminaria, Eisenia, and Ecklonia, may be connected by
these deep-water refugia.
Although Macrocystis and other kelps generally require about 1% of sea-surface light to
grow (Lüning 1981), this is a simplification because light requirements differ for the vari-

50

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

0.035
0.030

Growth Rate (day¯¹)

0.025
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
–0.005
–0.010
0.0

0.5

1

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

5.0

5.5

6.0

Irradiation (E m¯² day¯¹)
figure 3.4
Production–irradiance curves for M. pyrifera. The average growth rates during 1979–1982 (i.e., mean
instantaneous relative growth rate ±95% confidence interval) of juveniles transplanted to the San
Mateo and San Onofre kelp forests in southern California versus mean daily irradiance levels during
transplant period. Circled values are for plants that were nutrient limited in different years. Others
were not nutrient limited. Lines are von Bertalanff y fits. Horizontal dotted line indicates light compensation above which plants are in net production and below which they are in net respiration.
source: From Dean and Jacobsen (1986).

ous life stages of the same plant, and ambient light varies considerably. Nevertheless, the
1% level translates into around 1 mol m−2 day−1, which is a reasonable reference for Macrocystis requirements (Table 2.1). The values in the table should be considered approximate
because requirements can vary with geographic location, temperature, nutrients (Lüning
and Neushul 1978), water motion (Wheeler 1980a), and, for photosynthetic measurements on adult blades, age and position in the water column (Wheeler 1980b).
All plants have a characteristically shaped curve describing the relationship between
irradiance levels and productivity, called “P-E” or “P-I” curves. These translate into carbon production or growth (Miller, R. J. et al. 2011, Tait and Schiel 2011). One form of
this is a growth curve generated for Macrocystis. It can be readily seen that the relationship between irradiance and growth will depend on other factors, in this case nutrients
(figure 3.4). Dean and Jacobsen (1986) found that when nutrients were sufficient, plants
were in net respiration below 0.5–0.7 mol m−2day−1. Above this level, there is increasing growth with increasing irradiance to around 2–3 mol m−2 day−1, beyond which a
saturating level of growth (called “P-max”) is achieved. When nutrients were far lower,
suppression of growth occurred across the irradiance regime.

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

51

Macrocystis fertility will decline if less blue light is available. Dean et al. (1983) estimated that Macrocystis gametophytes outplanted on artificial substrata in a southern
California kelp forest must receive the light necessary to become fertile within about
40 days. Beyond this time, mortality sources such as sedimentation and grazing are
apparently so high that few gametophytes can survive. This life history stage can live
and grow for much longer periods in the laboratory (Sanbonsuga and Neushul 1980),
but the extent to which gametophytes can be long-lived on natural substrata in the field
is unknown. This has a bearing on the duration of potential “seed banks” in kelp forests
(Edwards 1999, 2000, Schiel and Foster 2006; discussed in Chapter 4). Larger stages
may survive longer at suboptimal light levels because they are partly above the bottom
and not as affected by these factors on benthic substrata.
As discussed earlier, adult Macrocystis plants are generally insensitive to changes
in subsurface light because they usually form a surface canopy and can translocate
the products of photosynthesis toward the holdfast (see Chapter 2). Light transmission
to the bottom is potentially restrictive of kelp populations because of water clarity, the
amount dissolved and suspended material in the water, and shading by attached organisms. The amount of surface light intensity varies with latitude, season, and cloud and
fog cover, but the range of intensities is much less than that created by water characteristics (Dean 1985). Day length is an important trigger for growth and reproduction
in some kelps associated with Macrocystis (review in Lüning 1993). However, Harrer et
al. (2013) found that for understory assemblages at four reefs in southern California,
saturating irradiance occurs for 1.3–4.5 hour day−1, depending on the time of year. The
vast majority of the variation in net primary production was due to the biomass of the
algae and only 2% annually was explained by bottom irradiance.
Light is attenuated logarithmically with depth and each wavelength has a particular
extinction coefficient (Jerlov 1968). The extinction coefficient also varies with turbidity.
In clear water, blue light is transmitted further than green light, while in more turbid
coastal water, the reverse occurs (Jerlov 1968). Overall light transmission declines with
increasing turbidity and, within the coastal water types designated by Jerlov (1968),
Lüning (1981) estimated that the depth where irradiance is reduced to 1% of surface
varies between 3 and 30 m, and Spalding et al. (2003) estimated this to be down to 40
m depth along the Big Sur coast of central California. Harrer et al. (2013) found that
over the course of a year, the percentage of surface light reaching the bottom (at around
9 m depth) ranged from around 4% to 10%. Gerard (1984) measured PAR beneath and
outside of canopies of giant kelp (figure 3.5). She found that at 1 m depth, just below a
thick giant kelp canopy in southern California, an average of only 17% of above-surface
light was available. This was reduced to around 2% at 11 m depth. She also found that
open water areas had about four times the light of areas beneath a giant kelp canopy. The
variance of light delivery was much greater in near-surface waters than in deeper water.
She also found there was a logarithmic decline of light transmission with an increasing number of blades of Macrocystis, highlighting the great effect that shading by giant

52

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

kelp canopies has on the light environment of communities below them. Some of the
earliest studies in kelp bed ecology postulated the effects of plant shading on the bottom
(e.g., Kitching et al. 1934). Numerous studies have shown that Macrocystis canopies can
reduce irradiance by over 90% (Neushul 1971b, Dean et al. 1983, Reed and Foster 1984,
Santelices and Ojeda 1984a), and dense surface canopies of giant kelp are often associated with a relatively sparse algal flora in the understory (Dawson et al. 1960, Neushul
1965, Foster 1982). Giant kelp canopies may also inhibit their own recruitment (e.g.,
Reed and Foster 1984). These effects are discussed in detail in Chapters 4 and 7.
Within a locality, understory algal cover (Foster 1982) and Macrocystis recruitment
(Rosenthal et a1. 1974, Reed and Foster 1984) can vary inversely with Macrocystis canopy
cover. Pearse and Hines (1979), Reed and Foster (1984), and Dayton et al. (1984) demonstrated with experimental plant and canopy removals that giant kelp canopies can inhibit
the recruitment and growth of the algae beneath them. Moreover, kelp recruitment on
a local scale usually coincides with times when the surface canopy is reduced, including
as a result of harvesting (Rosenthal et al. 1974, Kimura and Foster 1984). Santelices and
Ojeda (1984b) also reported an increase in M. pyrifera recruitment when the surface
canopy was experimentally removed. In contrast to some of the studies above, however,
understory kelp biomass decreased with removal of the surface canopy. Differences
among studies may be due, at least in part, to whether entire plants or only surface canopies were removed, and also the scale of the removal, as they all can affect shading from
surrounding plants. Furthermore, understory kelps such as Pterygophora californica, E.
arborea, and Laminaria spp. in the northern hemisphere, and Ecklonia and Lessonia species in the southern hemisphere can cause further light reductions, with consequent
effects on the heavily shaded communities below them (discussed in Chapter 7).
Given the numerous factors that affect light quality and transmission, it is hardly
surprising that light levels to the sea floor are frequently below those needed for growth
of juvenile sporophytes (figure 3.6). Dean and Jacobsen (1984) showed that light levels
1 m above the bottom of a kelp forest in southern California varied greatly throughout
the year, but in the summer months, irradiance fell below compensation irradiance, at
less than 0.5 mol m−2 day−1 in areas away from kelp canopies because of phytoplankton
blooms.
Water clarity or turbidity is influenced by terrestrial runoff, sediments resuspended
by wave surge (Quast 1971a), plankton abundance (Quast 1971a, Clendenning 1971b),
and probably dissolved and particulate matter produced by kelp forest organisms (Clendenning 1971b). We have observed the first three of these to produce near darkness on the
bottom in kelp forests at mid-day. Moreover, changes in water masses with changing
current conditions and tides can cause a rapid alteration in water clarity. For these reasons, short-term measurements of light on the bottom, although useful in comparing
nearby areas at the same time, need to be used with caution in characterizing the light
regime of a site. Light regimes, particularly if they are to be used for correlations with
algal recruitment and growth, should be determined with in situ continuous recorders.

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

53

0.10
A
0.08

Kelp

0.06

0.04
Open
water

Frequency

0.02

0
0

332

664

996

1328

1660

0.125
B
0.100

Kelp

0.075

0.050
Open
water

0.025

0
0

56

112

168

224

280

Quantum irrandiance (µE m¯² s¯¹)
figure 3.5
Frequency distributions of instantaneous quantum irradiance at (A) 1 m and (B) 8 m depths
in a M. ‘pyrifera’ forest in southern California and in adjacent open water.
note: Recording interval = 1 sec, taken in late morning, swell height = 30 cm, swell period = 10–17 sec.
Current velocity = 3–6 cm sec−1 at edge of canopy.
source: From Gerard (1984).

6.0

Irradiation (E m¯² day¯¹)

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

De

Ju

c

82

82
n

81
c
De

81
n
Ju

80
De

c

80
n
Ju

79
c
De

79
n
Ju

c
De

Ju

n

78

78

0.0

figure 3.6
Monthly integrated levels of quantum irradiation for the San Onofre kelp forest in southern California at 13.2 m depth 1 m above the bottom. Dashed line indicates compensating irradiation level for
juvenile Macrocystis growth.
source: From Dean and Jacobsen (1984).

Geographically, the light environment undoubtedly compromises the photosynthetic
ability of giant kelp near its northern limit in the northern hemisphere, but this probably acts in concert with other factors such as wave exposure to affect the northern
distribution of giant kelp in Alaska (Arnold and Manley 1985, Jackson 1987). Jackson’s
(1987) model showed that photosynthetic production is exceeded by respiration during
winter in high latitudes, and he concluded that “seasonal variation is so extreme that
the plant could not last the year at 53° N in 12 m of water, although it is able to survive
the year in shallower water.” How these photosynthetic parameters compare to those of
other Alaskan kelps is unknown, although there is a rich flora and abundance of kelp
species such as Eualaria (=Alaria) fistulosa, Nereocystis, and Saccharina (=Laminaria)
groenlandica in these cold waters (Duggins et al. 2003), which may well outcompete
Macrocystis as its own production capabilities decrease (e.g., Dayton 1975).

NU TR IENT S

Seaweeds, including Macrocystis, obtain their nutrients from the surrounding waters
because unlike most terrestrial plants they neither have true roots that can derive

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

55

nutrients from the soil nor is there soil. Kelp holdfasts are attached to solid substrata
and appear to serve no special nutrient uptake functions. Moreover, except for the occasional frond in the surface canopy, kelp tissues are not exposed to air and therefore all
metabolic processes occur in water.
The known nutrient requirements of giant kelp are listed in Table 2.2 and, of these,
nitrogen in its various forms has by far received the greatest attention as a possible limiting nutrient, particularly as it may affect Macrocystis in southern California (Jackson
1977, Wheeler and North 1981, Gerard 1982a, 1982b, 1982c, Zimmerman and Kremer
1984). Gerard (1982b) found that inorganic nitrogen concentrations in the surrounding
water must be in the order of 1–2 μmol L −1 (1 μM or 1 μmol = 1 μg atom) to support a
typical giant kelp growth rate of 4% increase in wet weight per day. Inorganic nitrogen concentrations vary widely in nearshore waters, but are particularly great during
upwelling or when there is terrestrial runoff (North et al. 1982). Nitrate levels inshore
are often low (often less than 1 μM) during summer and early autumn along the coast
of southern California and Baja California. This is especially so above the thermocline
when the water is thermally stratified and during periods when warm water masses
move into the region from the south (Jackson 1977, Wheeler and North 1981, North et
al. 1982, Hernández-Carmona et al. 2001, Ponce-Díaz et al. 2003).
The most common ionic and reactive forms of dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN)
are ammonium (NH4+), nitrite (NO2−), and nitrate (NO3−). Nitrate is most used for giant
kelp growth and production due to its high concentration, although other forms such
as urea can account for some uptake (Hepburn and Hurd 2005), as can ammonium
from sediment efflux and excretion by reef consumers when nitrate delivery is low
(Brzezinski et al. 2013). At Catalina Island in southern California, the daily variation in
nitrate concentration is frequently as much or greater than the mean seasonal variation
(Zimmerman and Kremer 1984). Reed et al. (2011), using 9 years of data, showed that
monthly averages of DIN (nitrate plus nitrite) in central California were always above
3 μmol L −1, that the springtime peak of DIN was a month later and over two times the
concentration of that in southern California, and that DIN averaged less than 1 μmol
L −1 for the six consecutive months of June through November in southern California.
The relationships between nitrate uptake and giant kelp growth parameters have been
well described for sites in southern California (Zimmerman and Kremer 1984, Kopczak
et al. 1991, Kopczak 1994). For example, Zimmerman and Kremer (1984) and Zimmerman and Robertson (1985) showed there was a hyperbolic, saturation relationship
of frond elongation rate with increasing levels of nitrate (figure 3.3B). Growth was considerably reduced below 1 μM but reached a plateau beyond around 2 μM. A similar
relationship was found for frond initiation rate and nitrate concentration, although the
saturation level was less defined (Zimmerman and Robertson 1985).
Nutrients and their delivery act in tandem with several other abiotic factors. One of
the best known is the inverse relationship between temperature and nitrate (fi gure 3.2).
This relationship varies between sites and years, but generally shows a strong correlation

56

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

between nitrogen and seawater temperature below around 15°C, although this can be
highly variable (e.g., McPhee-Shaw et al. 2007, Sherlock et al. 2007, Lucas et al. 2011). At
higher temperatures, nitrate and DIN generally fall below the 1 μM required for growth
of giant kelp. McPhee-Shaw et al. (2007), for example, found that at temperatures less
than around 11°C, the relationships for two regions of southern California converge.
They found that these cold temperatures occurred only during upwelling of deep, outershelf water masses, and that site similarities at the coldest temperatures reflected the
homogeneous nature of nutrient concentration in deeper waters. A similar relationship
between nitrate and temperature is seen near the southern limit of the northern hemisphere distribution of giant kelp at Baja California, Mexico, although the inflection point
for maintaining giant kelp growth was found to be slightly higher at 18.5°C during an El
Niño year (Hernández-Carmona et al. 2001, Edwards and Estes 2006). Also reflecting
the relationship between nutrients and temperature is the reduced growth rate–irradiance relationship seen during El Niño years when nutrients are depleted along the U. S.
west coast (e.g., figure 3.4). This relationship may not be similar in other geographic
areas, as Buschmann et al. (2013) reported that annual giant kelp populations in Chile
declined at around 17°C when nitrate was above 3 μmol L −1.
In southern California, giant kelp canopies commonly deteriorate during summer
when inorganic nitrogen is low, although senescence can also be a factor (Rodriguez et
al. 2013). Reduced nitrogen concentrations were probably also responsible for the massive
loss of Macrocystis during the warm-water period of the late 1950s (North 1971a, Jackson
1977, North et al. 1982), and plants deteriorate at many locations during El Niño events
due to a combination of high temperatures, storms, and severe nutrient reduction (e.g.,
Dayton and Tegner 1984, Edwards and Estes 2006, Parnell et al. 2010). Evidence that low
inorganic nitrogen, and not temperature, is limiting under conditions of low nutrients
and high temperatures comes from fertilization experiments. Dean and Deysher (1983)
found that more sporophytes were produced on fertilized artificial substrata inoculated
with giant kelp spores and placed within a kelp forest than on similarly treated but unfertilized controls. Hernández-Carmona et al. (2001) did a similar experiment that increased
sporophyte recruitment as well the survivorship of juveniles transplanted to fertilized
areas. Furthermore, others have found that there is not a typical growth response curve
involving temperature alone. Zimmerman and Kremer (1986) found, for example, that
frond elongation was constant between 14.5°C and 18.5°C, but above this range there
was a linear decline in growth rate. It may be the case, however, that in summer other
nutrients or temperature may be limiting once the nitrogen requirements of the plants
are met. Laboratory studies by Manley and North (1984) suggested that phosphorous
may be particularly important. North (1983) added nitrate and phosphate to seawater of
ambient temperature (18–23°C) flowing into a large tank containing adult Macrocystis.
These plants maintained healthy canopies and had high tissue concentrations of nitrogen,
whereas nearby plants in the natural kelp forest, exposed to similar temperatures but not
fertilized, suffered canopy losses and had low tissue concentrations of nitrogen.

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

57

Physiological processes within giant kelp plants can further obscure the relationship
between nitrogen in the water column and plant growth. Gene expression for nitrogen
acquisition varies along fronds. This may be a response to the distribution of nitrate
in the water column but complicates an assessment of nitrate–growth relationships
(Konotchick et al. 2013). Moreover, seaweeds can store nitrogen when the concentration
in the surrounding water is high, sometimes called “luxury consumption,” and then
use these reserves for growth when the surrounding concentration drops (Chapman
and Craigie 1977). However, there are considerable differences among species of kelps
in their abilities to do this because of their differential capacities for storage and the
duration they can go without new nitrogen input (e.g., Gerard 1982a, Korb and Gerard
2000). Macrocystis can accumulate nonstructural nitrogen compounds (Wheeler and
North 1981, Gerard 1982a) including nitrate, and then use these reserves to maintain
growth for at least two weeks, but probably not greatly longer, in low nitrogen environments (Gerard 1982a). Therefore, both the frequency of environmental sampling for
inorganic nitrogen and the presence of tissue reserves can affect the interpretation of
growth rates with respect to inorganic nitrogen.
The use of inorganic nitrogen in the water by giant kelp is also affected by water
motion (Gerard 1982c, Wheeler 1982). Increased water flow over plants enhances
uptake by increasing nutrient transport through the diff usion boundary layer (Neushul
1972, Gerard 1982c). Gerard (1982c) and Wheeler (1982) found that nitrogen uptake by
Macrocystis increased with increasing current speed up to a maximum at around 2–4
cm sec−1. Current velocities in kelp forests are often lower than this (Wheeler 1980a).
However, Gerard (1982c) showed that water flow caused by wave surge can be equivalent
to that of the current speeds above, and pointed out that because the plants are attached
to the bottom and each blade is attached to a fi xed point on the plant, very small waves
can produce flag-like blade movement. This motion plus small currents and surge are
sufficient to saturate nitrogen uptake even under very calm conditions. Furthermore,
blade morphology is a highly variable trait and is responsive to different flow regimes,
which can increase uptake of nutrients for photosynthesis and reduce drag in exposed
conditions (Druehl and Kemp 1982, Koehl et al. 2008).
Geographically, nutrients, particularly nitrogen, undoubtedly play a key role in the
southern limit of giant kelp in the northern hemisphere. The inverse relationship
between temperature and nutrients is driven to a great extent by upwelling of cold,
nutrient-rich water along the coastline (Jackson 1977, Konotchick et al. 2012). The southernmost giant kelp population along Baja California, Mexico, is somewhat ephemeral,
occasionally dying off during periods of high temperature (around 23°C) and nutrient
depletion (Edwards and Hernández-Carmona 2005). This is usually associated with El
Niño conditions, which also produce large storm waves (Edwards 2004). Some concern
has been expressed that with increased temperatures due to a changing climate, the
southern limit of giant kelp may be decreased by several hundred kilometers (Ladah
et al. 1999, Edwards and Estes 2006). However, it is noteworthy that Macrocystis has

58

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

few populations in the southern part of Baja California, and most of these are greatly
influenced by El Niños. Because of the particular circumstances of upwelling and high
nutrients that allow these southern populations to exist in generally warm subtropical
waters (Dawson 1951), it may be the case that its occurrence, rather than its disappearance, is the exception. The southern distributional limit of giant kelp may, in part, also
be the result of its limited ability to store nutrients (e.g., Gerard 1982a, 1982b) when
they are available. Might the northern limit (in the northern hemisphere) reflect the
inability to store carbon when sufficient light is available? Macrocystis certainly does not
have the abilities of some high latitude kelps to accumulate and store carbon reserves to
fuel growth several months later. For example, the Arctic subtidal environment is highly
constrained seasonally in light and nutrient availability, and kelps there have varying
responses to these conditions (Kain 1979). For example, the high Arctic circumpolar
kelp Laminaria solidungula lives for much of the year in dark conditions under sea ice.
Plants achieve their greatest growth rates during iced-over conditions when there is little
light but high levels of inorganic nitrogen (NH4+ + NO2− + NO+3 ) (Chapman and Lindley
1980, Dunton and Schell 1986). During the ice-free period, when growth might be
expected, there is almost no measurable N in the water. However, the amount of light
reaching plants during the open-water months affects thallus tissue density and carbon
content (Dunton 1990). A reserve of carbohydrate, in the form of the polysaccharide
laminaran, is built up as light becomes available, and this supports the carbon demand
of growth in low-light periods. Macrocystis, however, can store carbon for only a matter
of weeks (Rosell and Srivastava 1985) and so would almost certainly be limited by the
low light and inorganic carbon availability in far northern waters. When light levels are
high, stored carbohydrate may not be necessary in Macrocystis (Zimmerman and Kremer 1986), but this condition probably does not occur for long in far northern latitudes.
To close this section, we discuss studies that have dealt with the integrated nature
of nutrient supply, uptake, and primary production with other factors. The delivery of
nitrogen across inner shelf areas involves a series of complicated processes and includes
alongshore currents, Ekman transport, and upwelling, internal waves, vertical stratification, and terrestrial runoff, and can also be affected inshore by upstream kelp forests
(Jackson 1977, McPhee-Shaw et al. 2007). McPhee-Shaw et al. (2007) did a 2-year study
on mechanisms of nutrient delivery to inner shelf areas of southern California. They
found that spring and winter upwelling provided between 70% and 85% of the DIN to the
inner shelf region, internal waves provided 8–14%, and terrestrial runoff from 4% to 35%.
Others have speculated that the input of nitrogen, mostly as ammonia, from excretion
by benthic animals and fishes makes a small contribution to the nitrogen used by algae
(Bray et al. 1981, 1988). The analyses of Brzezinski et al. (2013) indicate that ammonium
can be a significant source of DIN to meet the N demand of giant kelp during periods
when nitrate delivery is inadequate. Some recycling occurs (i.e., water to kelp to animal
to water) but some, especially by blacksmith (Chromis punctipinnis), is imported as the
fish eat plankton at the edge of the forest and then excrete it in shelters within the forest

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

59

at night (Bray et al. 1981). This contribution is probably minor, given the other much larger
sources of N. However, it has been reported that frond-dwelling organisms may make
important nitrogen contributions to giant kelp. In southern New Zealand, Hepburn and
Hurd (2005) found that colonial invertebrates encrusting the blades of Macrocystis did
not have a negative effect on growth through shading and by acting as a barrier to nutrient uptake, as was anticipated. Instead, during periods of low inorganic nitrogen levels
in seawater, heavily colonized giant kelp fronds had greater growth than less colonized
fronds. They speculated that hydroids, through ammonium excretion, could provide over
70% of nitrogen required by fronds when seawater nutrients were low.
Finally, a remarkably thorough study on physical pathways and use of nitrate by giant
kelp was done by Fram et al. (2008), which will probably stand for some time as the
most comprehensive study on this complicated topic. They quantified biological, physical, and chemical factors affecting nitrate uptake, measuring nitrate concentrations for
13 months and characterizing delivery with respect to thermal structure and current
velocities inside and outside a kelp forest in southern California. They found that nitrate
concentrations varied enormously around and within the kelp forest, and especially so
during a period of stratification when nitrate varied by up to two orders of magnitude
within a single day. Nitrogen acquisition in growing canopy fronds varied by a factor of
six over a year even though there were two orders of magnitude differences in nitrate
concentrations over the same period. Surprisingly, they showed that the kelp bed used
up only around 5% of the nitrate supplied to the forest. They also found that the percentage of available nitrogen used by giant kelp is proportional to its residence time in the
forest, and that this averaged only around 1.1 hours. This compares to the much longer
flushing times of once weekly, with nitrate uptake of 4 hours, reported for the much
larger Point Loma kelp forest where flow is dominated by cross-shore currents (Jackson
and Winant 1983). Fram et al. also found that nitrate from upwelling periods supported
50% of net nitrogen acquisition by the kelp forest during their 13-month study. Assessing the influence of internal waves was difficult because their activity co-occurred with
other processes. Nevertheless, they calculated that internal waves were strongest in late
spring to early summer when seawater nitrate was low and kelp abundance was relatively high. Internal waves were found to account for up to 27% of nitrogen demand
by kelp during summer and autumn. They also found that the nitrate from freshwater
runoff was low because there was little rainfall during their study. Finally, they estimated that excretion of ammonia by Membranipora, a bryozoan inhabiting kelp blades,
contributed up to 0.12 μm g−1 month−1 for fronds during warm stratified periods, a
source of nitrogen initially elaborated on by Hepburn and Hurd (2005).

WATE R M OTI O N

To anyone visiting a wave-swept temperate zone coastline after a storm, the effects of
water motion are quite obvious in the huge abundance of macroalgae tossed up on

60

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

shore. Piles of Macrocystis can be several meters deep in such circumstances inshore
from a giant kelp forest (figure 2.2). However, the effects of water motion are usually not
so direct and obvious. In fact, they are pervasive and influence all aspects of the morphology, physiology, demography, and probably evolution of kelp. Water motion in all of
its complexities and manifestations, therefore, constitutes one of the most fascinating
factors in the biology and ecology of kelp forests.
We have argued that to understand the complex life histories of kelps and other habitat-forming seaweeds, they must be evaluated within the context of their highly dynamic
nearshore environments, particularly with respect to physical disturbances (Schiel and
Foster 2006). Stevens et al. (2001) framed the effects of water motion on kelp within two
research themes. These were the ability to withstand wave forces that stretch fronds and
affect survival in wave-swept environments, and understanding the boundary layers
and flows around fronds that affect nutrient transport. In addition to these themes, however, are the interactions of water motion with numerous other factors. As discussed in
the sections above, water motion affects the underwater light environment and therefore
light acquisition by algae through light flecking and turbidity (Dring 1987, Dromgoole,
1988, Wing and Patterson 1993). It affects the transport of nutrients, plankton, and
materials into and out of kelp forests (Wildish and Kristmanson 1997, Gaylord et al.
2007), sediment transport that can smother algae and impede recruitment (Devinny
and Volse 1978, Taylor and Schiel 2003), and nutrient uptake by kelp fronds (Wheeler
1980a, Hurd et al. 1996, Denny and Roberson 2002). Numerous ecological processes
are influenced by water motion including herbivory via sea urchin mortality (Ebeling
et al. 1985), changes in sea urchin behavior (Cowen et al. 1982, Konar et al. 2014),
alterations in available drift algae (Pearse and Hines 1979, Harrold and Reed 1985),
propagule and larval dispersal (Reed et al. 1988, Gaylord and Gaines, 2000, Gaylord
et al. 2002, 2006a, b, Graham 2003, Vásquez et al. 2006), algal reproduction (Serrao
et al. 1996, Pearson et al. 1998), and settlement and recruitment dynamics (Vadas et al.
1990, Taylor and Schiel 2003, Taylor et al. 2010). Furthermore, climatic events such as
ENSO and the Pacific Decadal Oscillation affect water motion and long-term structure
of kelp forest communities (Dayton et al. 1992, Parnell et al. 2010). Across this wide
spectrum, there has been significant progress over the past 20 years in understanding
the effects of water motion across a range of physical scales. This reflects not only a
growing interest in better integrating biological, ecological, and physical processes but
also the development of new technologies and instruments that can measure physical
processes from oceanographic to boundary layer scales.
Currents and surge produced by wind, tides, and waves produce drag, acceleration,
and inertial forces acting on kelp forests (Gaylord et al. 2008, 2012). Currents are unidirectional flows, often changing on short time scales, while surge moves back and forth
over the bottom, as well as up and down above the bottom (figure 3.7). Current speeds
in kelp forests are highly variable but are generally in the range of near 0–15 cm sec−1
(Wheeler 1980a, Bray 1981, Jackson 1983, Gaylord et al. 2007), although Neushul et al.

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

61

0.4 m sec¯¹

1.3 m sec¯¹

2m
6m

1.3
m sec¯¹

Wave
T = 15 sec
0.4 m sec¯¹
L = 120 m
C = 8 m sec¯¹
Surge

5m
figure 3.7
Water motion produced by swells in shallow water. Note that the
orbital motion of water particles flattens toward the bottom, eventually becoming entirely horizontal to produce surge. In the example
shown, a 5 m excursion of water was measured on the bottom at a
depth of 6 m, when a 2 m wave moved past at a velocity (C) of
8 m sec−1, a wavelength (L) of 120 m, and a wave period (T) of 15 sec.
Orbital velocities at the surface are also shown.
source: From Foster and Schiel (1985).

(1967) measured maximum speeds of 40 cm sec−1 near Anacapa Island off southern
California. The drag at higher speeds can pull Macrocystis over at angles up to 30° from
vertical, and the entire surface canopy may be submerged as a result (Neushul et al.
1967).
The kelp forest itself affects local currents. As a result of plant drag, current speeds
within kelp forests are often two to three times lower than the surrounding water (Jackson and Winant 1983), and if the forest is small, the incoming current will diverge
around it, producing a “bow wake” similar to that of a ship (Jackson 1983, Gaylord et al.
2007, Rosman et al. 2007). The reduction of surface waves by kelp plants is commonly
observed as “quiet water” inshore from kelp forests (cf. Darwin 1839), and artificial,
kelp-like tethered floats have been used in the past as breakwaters to reduce water movement in harbors (Isaacs 1976).
Surge speeds can be much higher than those of currents, particularly surges generated by long-period swells associated with winter or tropical storms. In central California, for example, 4 m high swells are typical in winter and produce water speeds of
over 1 m sec−1 on the bottom at kelp forest depths (10 m). The force generated by water
moving this fast is equivalent to that produced by a wind speed of 126 mph (i.e., 56 m
sec−1; Charters et al. 1969), which is quite sufficient to wrench benthic organisms from
the bottom and fracture the bottom in the process. Utter and Denny (1996) characterized the forces acting on giant kelp in the water column (figure 3.8). In their simplified
model, motion is considered to be in the vertical plane parallel to wave direction, and a

62

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

Wave propagation
L
H
Still-water
level

Buoyancy
M
Tension

d
x

Drag and
accelerational force

y
0,0

Sea floor

figure 3.8
A schematic representation of the components of the numerical
model of kelp mechanics.
note: d = water depth; x, y = horizontal and vertical components of kelp
position in the vertical plane; M = mass of point element representing a
kelp frond; H = wave height; L = wavelength. Not drawn to scale.
source: Reprinted from Utter and Denny (1996), with permission from
Elsevier.

kelp frond is a point element tethered to the sea floor by a flexible and stretchable stipe.
M has a mass equal to that of the frond and is subjected to the same forces as the whole
frond. The stipe has a tensile stiffness when stretched beyond its resting length and is
attached at (x = 0, y = 0). Although empirically rates of kelp dislodgement were greater
than those predicted by their model, it remains a useful depiction of forces that act on
kelp.

IMP IN GEMEN T A ND INER T I A L FO R C E S

Gaylord et al. (2003, 2008) pointed out that the traditional view is that canopy-forming
kelps move passively with the flows, which results in a decrease in water speed relative
to fronds, thereby minimizing drag (e.g., Koehl 1984, 1986, 1999). However, when
fronds are extended to their limit, there may be a jerk-like inertial force of deceleration
acting on them for short periods (e.g., Denny et al. 1997, 1998, Gaylord and Denny
1997). They also clarified that “impingement” forces from breaking waves have far less
of an effect on subtidal kelps than on those such as Egregia menziesii in the very shallow
subtidal zone. Peak force transients associated with these can be raised by a factor of
three relative to drag, and these can get disproportionately large with increasing sizes
of seaweeds.

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

63

Storm-associated surge is perhaps the most important source of mortality for adult
Macrocystis, at least in California (ZoBell 1971, Rosenthal et al. 1974, Gerard 1976, Foster 1982, Dayton et al. 1984, Reed and Foster 1984, Reed et al. 2008) and at sites studied
in Argentina (Barrales and Lobban 1975). Plants are often torn loose in patches during
storms and this can have considerably enhanced effects when these individuals become
entangled with other plants, increasing the drag on their holdfasts and causing further
detachments (Rosenthal et al. 1974). If the substratum is very hard and holdfasts are
firmly attached, water motion may remove mainly the long fronds, leaving holdfasts and
small fronds that may continue to grow (Foster 1982, Reed et al. 2008).
The susceptibility of Macrocystis fronds and plants to removal by water motion may
translate into site and regional differences in plant densities and the extent of surface
canopies. For example, in southern California, the east–west orientation of the shoreline, the protection afforded by offshore islands, and the distance from the northerly
source of winter storms combine to make kelp forests relatively protected from frequent
large swells (Cavanaugh et al. 2011). Surface canopies in this region typically vary in
extent over a cycle of 3–4 years (North 1971a, Rosenthal et al. 1974, Cavanaugh et al.
2013), probably related to an increased susceptibility of older and larger plants with
deteriorating holdfasts to removal by water motion. A similar cycle of growth, holdfast
deterioration, and removal by storms occurs along the coast of Chubut in Argentina
(Barrales and Lobban 1975). Canopies around Santa Barbara are even less variable, with
occasional catastrophic losses from large swells or warm water periods (North 1971a).
The patterns of large losses have been clearly demonstrated by the large winter swells
associated with the El Niño events since the early 1980s (e.g., Grove et al. 2002). During the 1982–1983 El Niño, storm waves removed nearly 70% of the adult Macrocystis at
some sites in the Point Loma kelp forest near San Diego (Dayton and Tegner 1984), and
over 90% of the surface canopy along the Palos Verdes Peninsula, Los Angeles (Wilson
and Togstad 1983), whereas some protected sites around Catalina Island (offshore of
Los Angeles) still had a surface canopy of Macrocystis (Ebeling et al. 1985, Foster and
Schiel 1993).
In contrast, most canopies in central California undergo a regular seasonal change,
with growth in spring and summer leading to maximum development in early autumn,
and then frond and plant loss during storms in late autumn and winter (Miller and
Geibel 1973, Cowen et al. 1982, Foster 1982, Kimura and Foster 1984). In addition to
such seasonal changes, there are year-to-year differences correlated with the severity
of winter swells (Foster 1982). As in southern California, this was especially evident
in the winter of 1982–1983 when swells over 7 m high with a 21-second period were
recorded in central California (Seymour 1983). Almost all of the Macrocystis canopies
were removed by large swells along the entire coast of California over this period (Reed
et al. 2006—“An experimental investigation”).
Reed et al. (2011) made significant inroads into understanding the interaction of
water motion, nutrients, grazers, and production of giant kelp. In examining 17 sites in

64

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

central and southern California over 9 years, they found that “significant wave heights”
(i.e., the top one-third of wave heights, which removes the “noise” of smaller waves) were
on average about 1 m higher through the year in central than in southern California
(Reed et al. 2011). Sea urchin densities in southern California averaged 3–14 m−2 compared to near zero in central California because of sea otter predation. Nutrients (nitrate
and nitrite) averaged up to six times greater in central California. Nevertheless, net primary production was almost double in southern California because storms consistently
reduced the standing crop of giant kelp in central California before the beginning of the
season of maximum growth. Almost all Macrocystis canopies were removed in winter
storms annually in central California, but only about 50% of the canopy was removed
annually in the south. Furthermore, there was relatively little interannual variation in
central California but great variation in the south because of occasional storms every
few years that did remove much of the canopy. They concluded that cycles of disturbance
and recovery were very important and easier to detect in giant kelp because of its fast
growth, relatively short life, and its great proportion of biomass on the sea surface that
makes it susceptible to wave disturbances. Cavanaugh et al. (2011) used satellite imagery
of the canopies of kelp beds over the entire Santa Barbara Channel in southern California to examine their dynamics with respect to climatic data. They found a strong positive polynomial relationship between maximum wave height and the percentage loss of
canopy (figure 3.9A), and that only the extreme wave events seemed to control regional
kelp biomass. They also found recovery of canopy biomass in spring was negatively
associated with SST (figure 3.9B) but not with wave height or other lower-frequency
climate indices.
Of additional importance are effects on light caused by removal of overstory canopies
during storms. Graham et al. (1997) showed that the seasonal removal of giant kelp canopies had flow-on effects in population dynamics. The numbers of recruit Macrocystis
increased when canopies were removed, presumably because of increased irradiance,
and were able to grow to adult sizes if adults were below a “threshold” density of around
10 plants per 100 m2.
Other studies have concluded that if swells are too extreme, Macrocystis may not be
able to persist; stands of all three ecomorphs of giant kelp are consistently described as
occurring on “moderately exposed” to “protected” shores (e.g., Druehl, 1978, Villouta
and Santelices 1984, Attwood et al. 1991, Vásquez et al. 2006). In the absence of biotic
factors such as competition (Santelices and Ojeda 1984b), swells can determine the
shoreward depth limit of kelp forests (North 1971a, Graham 1997) because, for a given
set of swell conditions, surge speed increases as depth decreases.
On a biogeographic scale, increasing wave exposure may be a significant factor in
the northern distributional limit of Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ along the west coast of North
America. It does not occur in large stands in the wave-driven coastline north of Año
Nuevo Island (near Santa Cruz) in central California, and is largely replaced by the
surface canopy-forming bull kelp Nereocystis luetkeana, which is extremely resistant to

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

65

A

Winter loss
100

Percent loss (%)

80

60

40
r 2 = 0.50
p < 0.001

20

0

3

4

5

6

7

8

Max wave height (m)

B

Spring recovery
9

10

biomass (kg)

r 2 = 0.25
p = 0.01
108

107

106
12

13

14

15

16

Mean SST (°C)
figure 3.9
Regression analyses between (A) winter giant kelp canopy biomass losses and maximum significant
wave height and (B) spring–summer kelp canopy biomass recovery and mean sea-surface temperature (SST) across the kelp forests of the Santa Barbara Channel in southern California. Winter losses
were calculated as the percent change in kelp canopy biomass from the fall (September to November)
maximum to the winter–spring (December to May) minimum. Recovery represents the log10 change
in kelp canopy biomass from the winter–spring (December to May) minimum to the summer (June to
August) maximum. Maximum wave height and mean SST for each year were calculated over the same
periods.
source: From Cavanaugh et al. (2011).

breakage from water drag (Koehl and Wainwright 1977, Koehl et al. 2008). Surge is
also thought to be the reason that giant kelp is restricted to calmer waters in northern
and central Chile, replaced by the kelp Lessonia trebeculata on exposed shores (Villouta
and Santelices 1984). Differences in the occurrences of surface and subsurface canopy
kelps may also be related to differences in life history characteristics, growth rates, and
susceptibility to grazing.
Other forms of Macrocystis are affected by water motion in various ways. M. ‘integrifolia’ occurs in more sheltered areas of the coast of California and British Columbia and
rarely extends beyond around 6 m depth (Druehl 1981). In southern Chile, these distributional patterns may be different. Buschmann et al. (2006) examined populations
of Macrocystis in southern Chile. They found that M. ‘pyrifera’ had higher densities and
less variation in abundance in protected sites compared to exposed sites. Furthermore,
populations in protected areas showed an annual cycle with most recruitment during
late winter and fertile sporophytes in summer and autumn, but with loss of plants
through to the following recruitment period. M. ‘integrifolia,’ however, had similar densities throughout the year in exposed and protected sites, with similar reproductive
periodicity.

B O U NDA RY L AY ER EFFEC T S

Moving now from larger to smaller scales, Hurd and Pilditch (2011) pointed out that the
relationship between blade morphology, water motion, and resource acquisition and
allocation in kelp has been discussed for a century (Cotton 1912, Wheeler 1980a, Norton
et al. 1981, 1982, Hurd 2000, Roberson and Coyer 2004, Koehl et al. 2008). In recent
years, however, there have been significant advances in understanding the effects of
water motion on giant kelp with respect to boundary layers around kelp blades and how
water motion interacts with blade morphology and nutrient uptake. This topic was thoroughly reviewed by Hurd (2000), who discussed how the hydrodynamic environment
around macroalgae influences their physiology and ability to acquire essential nutrients.
Some of the earliest studies in this area were by Wheeler (1980a, 1982), who pointed out
that the fi xation of carbon during macroalgal photosynthesis is governed by a complex
series of interactions between biological and environmental variables. These include the
transport of CO2 through the surrounding fluid, cell wall, membrane, and cytoplasm
to the sites of carbon fi xation. The boundary layer is the thin layer of fluid through
which heat, momentum, and mass are moved from the fluid to the plant surface. The
thickness of the boundary layer depends on water motion, and so by increasing water
motion and decreasing boundary layer thickness, the transport distance is decreased.
Wheeler (1980a) used experiments in water tunnels and found that by increasing water
speeds over a Macrocystis blade surface from 0 to 4 cm sec−1, the photosynthetic output increased by 300%. Furthermore, a critical velocity was around 1 cm sec−1, beyond
which the boundary layer adjacent to a blade was turbulent. He also concluded that

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

67

morphological changes in kelp blades under different water motion regimes can be
at least partially explained by hydrodynamic adaptations. Gerard (1982a) showed that
boundary layer transport limited macronutrient uptake by Macrocystis when flow rates
over blades were less than 3 or 4 cm sec−1, and that nitrate uptake was saturated beyond
around 2.5 cm sec−1. However, she found that flow rates in the field always exceeded this
value, even in a dense kelp forest during conditions of low currents and a calm sea state.
It has long been surmised that in some kelp species, blade morphology and behavior
are adaptations for increased mixing at low water velocities (Wheeler 1980a, Hurd et
al. 1996). In flow, waves of deformation pass along kelp blades and cause them to flap
(Gerard 1982a, Hurd and Stevens 1997, Denny and Roberson 2002). This was tested
in British Columbia, where Hurd et al. (1996) studied the effects of water motion on
nitrogen uptake in distinct forms of Macrocystis ’integrifolia’ from protected and exposed
sites. They found for both blade morphologies that ammonium and nitrogen uptake
increased with increasing water velocity, with a maximum reached at 4–6 cm sec−1
and concluded that blade morphology does not enhance nutrient uptake in low flows.
Further work on sheltered and exposed blade morphologies showed that “there were no
obvious differences in how structural features such as marginal spines affected seawater flow around the different blade morphologies” (Hurd et al. 1997).
Hurd and Pilditch (2011) used novel techniques with electrodes to examine the
characteristics of boundary layers around Macrocystis in southern New Zealand. They
argued that although there is a compelling hypothesis that blade morphology in slow
flow enhances nutrient flux to blade surfaces by increasing turbulence and overcoming
limitations in mass transfer, there is little empirical evidence to support it. They used
a micro-optode, with a tip diameter of 20 μm, to measure O2 produced at the surface
of actively photosynthesizing blades to indicate the thickness of the boundary layer.
The diff usion boundary layer thickness varied from 0.67 to 0.80 mm and did not vary
with mainstream velocities between 0.8 and 4.5 cm sec−1. They further found that,
as hypothesized, boundary layer thickness decreased with increasing velocity both for
wave-exposed and wave-sheltered morphologies. They found that the boundary layer
was thicker within corrugations than along apices of blades, which effectively traps fluid
at the blade surface in corrugations and that corrugations are not turbulence-generating
structures. They went on to discuss several potential roles of corrugations in waveexposed plants, including increasing the surface-to-volume ratio for nutrient uptake,
reduction of drag, and providing a quiescent region into which extracellular enzymes
with important roles in carbon and nutrient acquisition may be safely deployed. For
wave-sheltered plants, they concluded that thinner boundary layers were due to the lack
of small-scale features that “trap” water at the surface. They concluded that when flows
were as low as 2 cm sec−1, the boundary layer can be so thin that it causes minimal
resistance to the passage of nutrients to blade surfaces, perhaps accounting for slower
growth of Macrocystis in wave-sheltered sites in southern New Zealand during autumn
when nitrogen is limited. It should be kept in mind, however, that a large, thin blade

68

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

morphology has a primary function of intercepting light (as in terrestrial leaves) and
providing a large surface-to-volume ratio for nutrient and gas exchange. Furthermore,
it was conjectured over a century ago that corrugations add strength to blades so that
they do not tear easily (Skottsberg 1907).

CO N CLU D IN G CO MME NT S

The inclusion of greater consideration of the abiotic environment, coupled with modern
instrumentation, across spatial scales from submillimeter to oceanwide, and temporal
scales up to decades, has heralded great advancement in our understanding of giant kelp
settlement, growth, and dynamics. This is yielding a far more comprehensive view of
kelp forests. We are gaining a much fuller appreciation of the fundamental processes
and mechanisms affecting the kelp plants themselves across their full life histories
and morphologies in different conditions. Rather than being precisely adapted to its
environments, giant kelp is highly labile and responsive to environmental variation at
its different life stages. We are gaining a much greater understanding about the underlying mechanisms affecting the variability of occurrence and performance of plants
and populations in their continuously dynamic nearshore environments. Of all facets
of kelp forest biology and ecology, this area of research, combined with great advances
in understanding the ecology of early life history stages, has progressed the most in
the 29 years since our last treatise on the ecology of giant kelp forests appeared (Foster
and Schiel 1985). We anticipate that a greater union of climatic, oceanographic, and
biological data, combined with a greater understanding of relevant spatial and temporal
scales, will continue to progress and will offer a more holistic understanding of these
important components of coastal ecosystems. They may also lead to better predictions
of anthropogenic impacts and a changing climate (discussed in Chapters 10 and 13).

THE ABIOTIC ENVIRONMENT

•

69

This page intentionally left blank

4
DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL,
AND CONNECTIVITY OF
POPULATIONS
Malthus (1798) saw the statistical properties of populations as common to
man, animals, and plants. “Through the animal and vegetable kingdoms,
nature has scattered the seeds of life abroad with the most profuse and liberal
hand. She has been comparatively sparing in the room and nourishment
necessary to rear them. The germs of existence contained in this spot of earth,
with ample food, and ample room to expand in, would fill millions of worlds in
the course of a few thousand years. Necessity, that imperious all pervading law
of nature, restrains them within the prescribed bounds. The race of plants and
the race of animals shrink under this great restrictive law.”
—Malthus (1798) from Harper and White (1974)

The presence, absence, status, and connectivity of kelp forests are essentially a numbers game based on demographic characteristics of settlement, growth, mortality, and
reproduction. Unsurprisingly, the demography of giant kelp is as variable as its morphology, responses to the abiotic environment, and interactions with other members of
its community. Because giant kelp lives mostly in dynamic nearshore waters, occupying much of the water column, its susceptibility to partial or complete removal from
severe water motion is a driving force in its ability to persist and replenish populations.
Density-dependent and density-vague processes come into play as canopies and plants
are thinned or removed and light gaps are provided to areas below. Furthermore, the
kelp beds or patches themselves have a demography, often called “patch dynamics”
within populations or “metapopulation dynamics” between populations, which are
related to but somewhat separate from that of individuals within populations. There is
a tendency to think of kelp forests as being continuously distributed along superficially
similar areas of coastline, but this is far from the case. Macrocystis is largely bound to
rocky substrata, which is patchily distributed. Patches, therefore, have sizes and spatial
distributions that affect the probability of dispersal and connectivity of kelp beds spatially and temporally. These discrete patches can show great variability in going extinct
and recolonizing over time. Also, within larger kelp patches, there is considerable spatial

71

variability that results from a wide array of interactions. In any case, the basic prerequisite for any replenishment of populations and re-establishment of patches or areas in
which plants have disappeared is the arrival of viable spores. Therefore, the production
of spores, their behavior in the water column, dispersal abilities, settlement characteristics, and subsequent development through life history stages become critical. If you
think of discrete kelp forest patches along a coastline, the concept of metapopulation
dynamics applies because these must be connected at least occasionally through time
both in terms of outbreeding and for re-establishment if patches go temporarily extinct,
such as through major storm events. In this chapter, we discuss the demography and
metapopulation ecology of giant kelp and the processes that underlie connectivity of
patches, including spore production and dispersal.

DEMOGR APHY

The topic of demography and population biology of large brown seaweeds was reviewed
by Schiel and Foster (2006). They contrasted Macrocystis and many other kelp species,
as well as comparing kelps with the other major taxon of habitat-dominating seaweeds,
the fucoids (order Fucales), finding considerable differences in reproductive output,
growth, survival, and longevity (figure 4.1). One critical difference between kelps and
fucoids is the “alternation of generations” of kelps, requiring spores to settle, grow into
gametophytes, become fertile, and achieve fertilization to 2N sporophytes, processes
that occur over several weeks. In contrast, fucoids begin with much bigger eggs, around
50–150 μm in diameter (Taylor et al. 2010) that are released directly from adult plants,
have no obligate period of development to achieve a 2N stage but instead are fertilized
directly at or soon after release, and so have orders of magnitude greater survival than
kelp spores. Furthermore, fucoids can be enormously long-lived, with some species
reaching several decades or more (Åberg 1992, Jenkins et al. 2004). Consequently, the
population dynamics of these major orders of large, habitat-forming seaweeds are quite
different, not only in their demographic properties but also in their susceptibilities to
disturbances, population turnover, and abilities and ways of replenishing and sustaining
populations. These contrasts between kelps and fucoids are not pursued further here
but, nevertheless, they stand as good reminders that even in the same environments,
there are many modes and mechanisms of population persistence for even superficially
similar species with many shared characteristics of dominating areas and facilitating
the presence of other species.
The first demographic study on giant kelp was done between 1967 and 1973 in a
forest offshore of Del Mar in southern California. Rosenthal et al. (1974) recorded the
positions of every Macrocystis plant within 1 m either side of a 100 m transect in 1967,
adding a further three 50 m transects a year later. The original mapped plants declined
steadily for 3 years when only 1 of the original 35 plants remained. Most mortality of
adult Macrocystis over the 6-year study was from detachment during storms, entangle-

72

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

A

Kelps
Spores
(N)

Meiosis

Life cycle

Gametophytes
(N)

Sporophyte
(2N)
Eggs

Zygote
(2N)

Sperm
(N)

Life history

BL

SO

Spores
(N)

S
H

Developing
sporophyte
(2N)

Gametophytes
& gametes
(N)

Mature
sporophyte
(2N)

With
egg Zygote
(2N)

Sperm

Time
Size (m)
Longevity (days)
Key events

B

10–5

10–4
Microscopic

10–3

5 x100

101

3 x 101

2 3

4,5

1

100
101–2
Macroscopic
1–3 x 10 2

6

4–6 x103
7

8

Fucoids
Meiosis

Life cycle
Plant
(2N)

Eggs Sperm
(N)
(N)
Zygote
(2N)

Life history
C

R

Mature
plant
(2N)

RFR

Sperm
(N)
Egg
(N)

Z
Z

REG

Time
10–4

Size (m)

5–6 x 101

Longevity (days)
Key events

10–3
Microscopic

4 9,10,6 / 9,6,11 / 5,6,12,11

10–1
100–1
Macroscopic
2 x 102

103–4
13

8

figure 4.1
Kelp (A) and fucoid (B) life cycles and life histories with emphasis on stages, sizes (plant length), longevities,
and events of particular relevance to population dynamics. The fucoid life history illustrates three possible
sequences leading from gamete production to attached zygotes or embryos.
C = conceptacle (cavity in which gametangia develop); BL = blade; H = holdfast; R = receptacle (terminal portion of
branch bearing conceptacles); REG = regeneration; RFR = reproductive frond release (in some fucoids); S = stipe;
SO = sorus; Z = zygote.
1: spore production; 2: spore dispersal; 3: spore settlement; 4: gamete production; 5: sperm dispersal; 6: fertilization;
7: sporangia development; 8: sporophyte / adult plant mortality; 9: sperm and egg dispersal; 10: egg settlement;
11: zygote settlement; 12: zygote dispersal; 13: development of gametangia.
source: From Schiel and Foster (2006).

ment with drifting adults, and kelp harvesting. The severe grazing by sea urchins seen
in other kelp forests at the time (Leighton 1971) did not occur at Del Mar. Rosenthal
et al. calculated that the oldest plant was around 7 years old. Their survivorship curve
showed, as would be expected, that most mortality occurred soon after recruitment
(figure 4.2A). Of 387 recruits, less than 10 survived after 6 months. Overall, they found
a paucity of recruitment, which they attributed to sedimentation from the coastline and
poor light quality from resuspension of sediments (discussed in Chapter 3).
Paul Dayton and colleagues, especially Mia Tegner, made major advances in our
knowledge of giant kelp forests over the past 40 years through a wide range of empirical
studies. Dayton et al. (1984) did a comprehensive study of the demography and patch
dynamics of Macrocystis and other kelp species for 3–10 years within several forests of
southern California. Using standard life tables they compared survival of several kelp
species from their juvenile stages onward (see figure 4.2A). They found in the Point
Loma kelp forest off San Diego that 1.6% of Macrocystis recruits survived for a year and
that only one of these plants, or 0.007% of the original cohort, lived to 86 months. The
understory stipitate kelp Pterygophora californica had greater survival and longevity, but
their analysis of this species started with larger established plants and so is not strictly
comparable to Macrocystis, at least in the early stages. Nevertheless, they found that,
once established, some 25% of Pterygophora plants survived for at least 11 years, but the
longest-lived Laminaria farlowii they found were about 6 years old. Other studies have
calculated that P. californica can live at least 12 years (Hymanson et al. 1990) and perhaps
up to 20 years (Reed and Foster 1984). Similarly, the understory kelp Eisenia arborea
had around 30% of its original numbers after 11 years. It seems clear from the study of
Dayton et al. (1984) that Macrocystis has a much faster turnover of individuals within
populations than some of the dominant understory species. This is consistent with the
susceptibility of the much larger Macrocystis plants to storm damage, which increases
as plants encroach into shallow water. For example, Dayton et al. (1984) also found that
cohorts at 5 m depth had only about half the rate of survival of those at 15 m depth.
Dayton et al. (1984) also considered three concepts of patch stability within kelp
forests: the persistence of patches through generations, the inertia or resistance of
patches to invasions or disturbance, and their resilience or recovery following disturbance. Resistance to invasion of these patches by other species is due to the overstory of
giant kelp and the undercanopy of smaller kelps, both of which inhibit recruitment, and
also to limits of effective dispersal. No kelp invaded Macrocystis patches, although giant
kelp invaded patches of smaller kelps, most likely due to both the massive reproductive
output of giant kelp and the fact that they need less than one successful recruit per
square meter to eventually dominate an area. As found in earlier studies (e.g., Pearse
and Hines 1979), recruitment and survival in all cases were far greater when canopies
had been removed. Winter storms were responsible for most mortality of giant kelp,
providing light gaps of various sizes for subsequent recruitment and also accounting for
the spatial mosaic of kelp seen within forests. Furthermore, patch persistence within all

74

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

A

California populations

1000

Ea

number surviving

Log10 number remaining

Pc
10
8
6
4
2
0
0

Lf
100

Mp-R
10

Mp1
Mp2
Mp3
1
2
Months

3

Mp-D
1
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Months after tagging
B

New Zealand population
100
< 0.5 m Size class
0.5–1 m Size class
80

Percentage survival

1–3 m Size class
> 3 m Size class
60

40

20

0
0

250

500

750

1000

Days
figure 4.2
Survivorship curves of kelps. (A) From various kelp forests in southern California, kelps at around 15 m depth,
adjusted to initial numbers of 1000. Both Macrocystis cohorts started as small recruits followed through time.
Laminaria farlowii (Lf) also from initial recruits. Pterygophora californica (Pc) and Eisenia arborea (Ea) began as
larger plants of unknown age at the start of the study. (B) Percentage survival of four size classes of Macrocystis in
a harbor near Christchurch in southern New Zealand.
Inset: Mp1 = Macrocystis, settled spores to microscopic sporophytes from Deysher and Dean (1986a – reprinted
with permission from Elsevier); Mp2 = Macrocystis, spores settled at high density, to visible sporophytes, from Reed
(1990a); Mp3 = Macrocystis, spores settled at low density, to visible sporophytes, from Reed (1990a). Y-axis is log
number surviving (orders of magnitude)
source: (A) Mp-R Macrocystis from Rosenthal et al. (1974); Mp-D and all other kelps from Dayton et al. (1984).
(B) From Pirker et al. (2000).

three forests was similar, with unchanged patch borders throughout the study. A major
conclusion of this study involved the fact that patches of Macrocystis can persist well
beyond the generation time of this species, which in hindsight is probably obvious since
forests have persisted in many locations in California since beds were first mapped in
the early 1900s (see Chapter 1, History of Research).
There are few other field-based demographic studies on giant kelp outside of California. Westermeier and Möller (1990) found that an intertidal population of Macrocystis in southern Chile showed maximal recruitment in October to December (austral
spring / summer) when most primary space was available after winter storms. The life
expectancy of a recruit, calculated as “half-life,” was only 45 days. They concluded that
these populations of Macrocystis have an annual life cycle, which can extend to 2 years
under favorable conditions. A 3-year study in southern New Zealand also showed considerable differences of the demography of Macrocystis compared to California populations.
Although it occurs along portions of the open coast of the east coast of southern New
Zealand, Macrocystis flourishes in the calm waters of large harbors. A study at two sites
in Akaroa Harbour, near Christchurch, found that the sea-surface canopy was greatest
during winter, when temperatures were low and nitrate levels high, and that canopy
deterioration occurred during the summer months (Pirker et al. 2000, Pirker 2002).
This is also the case in other large southern harbors of Lyttelton and Otago (Hay 1990,
Brown et al. 1997). As found elsewhere, there was a negative correlation between temperature and nitrate levels, and nitrates were particularly low in summer. Average frond
survival was 5.6–6.7 months and no fronds lived longer than 15 months. Survivorship
curves varied considerably for the different size / age stages of plants, with maximum
longevity of 2.5 years (figure 4.2B). One of the interesting findings of this study was
that the forests died back considerably when a large amount of sediment was dumped
into the water following heavy rainfall and a landslip. Sediment settled on Macrocystis
on the sea surface and along the reefs, both causing the deterioration of canopy plants
and impeding settlement and recruitment, so that the canopy fell to near zero the following year. These populations had high annual turnover, and individual plants rarely
had more than several fronds at a time.
All of these studies show there is considerable size dependency in the demographics of Macrocystis across its life stages. Adults generally decline in numbers over 3–4
orders of magnitude from when they are visible recruits, with longevity depending on
sites and conditions. During the initial phases of microsporophyte production, however,
numbers decline by 4–6 orders of magnitude, and there is also massive mortality during the period from spore release to microsporophyte production. For example, around
10 billion spores of an annual kelp, Alaria marginata, produced around 400 visible sporophytes in a study in central California (McConnico and Foster 2005). The only other
known estimate of survival from spore release to settlement for a laminarian was by
Chapman (1984) for two Laminaria species. He found that each species released around
10 billion spores per square meter in kelp beds and that proportional survival from

76

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

release to settlement was between 10 −3 and 10 −4 . Estimates of settled spore survival are
also small but orders of magnitude higher than free-floating spores. For Macrocystis,
Deysher and Dean (1986a) found that spores settled at about 3.3 × 108 m−2 produced
5 × 106 microsporophytes (figure 4.2A inset). Reed (1990a) seeded rocks with different
densities of spores of Macrocystis and the understory kelp P. californica, placed them
into a kelp forest, and counted the number of sporophytes that emerged. Although
the results were highly variable, spore densities of 106 and 108 m−2 produced 102 and
104 sporophytes per m2, respectively.
Effective recruitment and replenishment of populations are affected, of course, by a
multitude of factors influencing spore arrival, gametogenesis and growth, fertilization,
and sporophyte recruitment and growth. It is interesting to note that from the early fi nescale experiments of Foster (1975b) onward, there is no evidence of any facilitation of
recruitment in giant kelp. Although microfi lms of bacteria and other microorganisms
are potential facilitators, they are ubiquitous and develop very rapidly on new surfaces.
Macrocystis can be among the first organisms to settle onto surfaces and grow if viable
spores, space, nutrients, and light are adequate. From numerous studies it seems clear
that natural disturbances of overstory plants are essential features of successional events
in kelp forests.
Several mathematical models have been used to describe the growth and longevity of
fronds or plants of Macrocystis (e.g., Anderson 1974, Jackson 1987, Nyman et al. 1990).
Although interesting and instructive, no single model captures the innate variability of
demographic processes of Macrocystis across the wide range of environmental conditions it inhabits. Burgman and Gerard (1990) developed a stochastic population model
for Macrocystis that included five life history stages and took into account environmental
and demographic stochasticity as well as density-dependent interactions on a monthly
basis over 20 years. The five stages were gametes, microscopic sporophytes, blade-stage
sporophytes up to 1 m long, subadult sporophytes up to 10 m long, and adults with canopy fronds over 10 m long. Their model recognized the transition from gametophytes to
microscopic sporophytes through reproduction, and also the transitions of sporophytes
through various growth stages. This model showed the population density of adult sporophytes fluctuating around 0.1 plants per m2 on a seasonal cycle, which came close to
that observed in the field-based studies of North (1971a), Rosenthal et al. (1974), and
Dayton et al. (1984). It also identified that there were discrete, nonrandom “windows” of
recruitment, comprising about 35% of the months that were simulated, which is similar
to what was found in the empirical studies of Deysher and Dean (1986a, 1986b). Their
model also found that there was a high probability of extinction of the population during
El Niño events. Overall, this model incorporated many important features of populations and their variation and, in many ways, encapsulated the results of numerous studies showing the important density-dependent processes operating in Macrocystis forests.
Nisbet and Bence (1989) provided a model of “density-vague” population regulation
of Macrocystis, particularly concerning 5–10 year fluctuations in numbers in a single

DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL, AND CONNECTIVITY OF POPULATIONS

•

77

bed. In density-vague regulation, density-dependent behavior is seen only in very low
and very high densities, with populations fluctuating either randomly or in response
to variation in the environment at intermediate densities. As in other studies, they concluded that self-shading can limit populations, that variable recruitment can greatly
affect complex multiyear cycles, that factors not well understood at the time (labeled
“stochasticity”) such as light and nutrients could be crucial to population dynamics, and
that Macrocystis populations often had the characteristics of density-vague regulation.
We now know most of the key biotic and abiotic factors operating in Macrocystis population regulation (see, e.g., Chapter 3) and the great variation in populations encountered in at least California over about 100 years. The overwhelming conclusion from
these studies is the overarching effects of environmental variation on the dynamics of
Macrocystis populations, acting in different ways across all its life history stages.

ME TA P O P U L ATI O N S

Variation in the demography and population dynamics of giant kelp greatly affects its
“metapopulation” biology along a coastline. This occurs not only because of the presence, absence, or varying densities of kelp within forests but also through consequent
processes of reproductive output, dispersal, and recruitment which provide connectivity
within and among discrete patches (Levins 1969, Levin and Paine 1974, Hanski 1999)
along a coast. Dan Reed and colleagues analyzed spore dispersal and Macrocystis patch
structure to examine connectivity of populations over 34 years along 500 km of the
California coast (Reed et al. 2006—“An experimental investigation”). This is the most
thorough study yet done that analyzes the dynamics of discrete kelp patches over such
large spatial and temporal scales. Most early studies have cited the turn-of-the-century
maps by Crandall (1912, 1915), which was extended by North (1971a), to compare current with historical distributions of kelp patches in the Point Loma and San Diego area.
Reed and co-workers, however, took advantage of detailed aerial surveys of Macrocystis
beds from Point Conception south to the California–Mexico border done from 1958
onward by a kelp harvesting company (ISP Alginates, Inc.). From these surveys, the
biomass of harvestable kelp (0–1 m depth below the sea surface) was estimated and then
calibrated to the actual harvest. Data were ground-truthed in this way for 10 years and
then standardized from January 1968 to October 2002 (418 months) across 500 km of
coast between Point Arguello, California, to the United States–Mexico border. The aerial
surveys had 2–20 km resolution, which was not fine enough to capture metapopulation
dynamics of discrete patches, and so they augmented these with digital analysis of kelp
canopies for the few years that data were available from aerial infrared images at 3–5 m
resolution. By combining maps, they identified patches in which the Macrocystis canopy
was either contiguous or separated by less than 500 m. In their analyses, patches were
considered to be “occupied” if a surface canopy was present or “extinct” when no surface
canopy was detected.

78

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

A

B
0.3

0.3

r² = 0.005, P = 0.06

0.25
P (extinction)

P (extinction)

0.25

r² = 0.57, P < 0.0001

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

0

0
0

1

2

3

0

Square root (patch area), km

0.5

1.0

1.5

Patch isolation

figure 4.3
(A) Monthly probabilities for Macrocystis patch extinction versus patch size and (B) patch extinction
versus patch isolation. Data are from 69 patches of giant kelp observed from 1968 to 2002 along
the mainland coast of southern California. Patch size is defined as the square root of the area of the
patch in square kilometers. Patch isolation is defined as the inverse distance-weighted average size of
surrounding patches that are occupied in any given month, averaged over 418 months; low values of
patch isolation indicate a high degree of isolation (indicated by arrow).
notes: Lines show fitted least-squares regressions:
(A) P (extinction) = −0.0316√(patch area) + 0.0708.
(B) ln[P (extinction)] = −0.8643 ln(isolation) − 4.7217.
r2 and P values for regressions are as shown.
source: From Reed et al. “A metapopulation perspective” (2006).

They found a surprising degree of patch extinction and recolonization over the
34-year period. In the extreme cases, close to 100% of patches were occupied at times by
giant kelp but virtually none were occupied at other times, such as after the major 1982–
1983 El Niño. Underwater surveys showed that subsurface Macrocystis plants inhabited
many patches during this period, but they did not reach the canopy (and, hence, did not
appear in the aerial surveys). Furthermore, there was not only nutrient stress affecting
larger plants during this period but also recruitment failure because of the stressful
conditions. “Extinction” and “recolonization” were measured as the monthly probability
of a patch going from occupied to extinct, or vice versa. The monthly probability of a
patch going extinct was between 0.005 and 0.292, and from being extinct to occupied
from 0.023 to 0.200, showing, as in several previous studies, the highly dynamic nature
of giant kelp populations. Patch extinction lasted from 6 months or so to as long as
13 years, although 80% of extinct patches were recolonized within 2 years.
Two of the most important findings of Reed et al. (2006—“An experimental investigation”) relating to extinction involved the sizes of kelp patches and their distances
apart. The probability of patch extinction was negatively correlated with patch size
(figure 4.3A). All of the high probabilities of extinction were associated with small kelp

DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL, AND CONNECTIVITY OF POPULATIONS

•

79

Carpinteria – June
Carpinteria – Jan/Feb
Naples – June
Naples – Jan/Feb

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0
0.0001

Percent of interpatch distances less than X

Percent dispersing at least distance X

100

0
0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

Distance, km
figure 4.4
Dispersal among patches in southern California. Dispersal potential of giant kelp spores versus
distance between discrete patches. Spore dispersal distributions (solid lines) were simulated on the
basis of measured currents at Carpinteria Reef (squares) and Naples Reef (circles) from June 1 to 30,
2001 (open symbols) and January 15 to February 15, 2001 (closed symbols; see text for details). The
left vertical axis indicates the probability of dispersing at least as far as the distance on the horizontal axis. The distribution of distances between patches (dashed line) was calculated from distances
between all pairs of occupied patches in all months of the study period (418 months). The right vertical axis indicates the percentage of distances between patches that were less than the distance on the
horizontal axis.
source: From Reed et al. “A metapopulation perspective” (2006).

patches, those less than around 0.25 km2 (i.e., the square of 0.5 in figure 4.3A). Beyond
an area of 1 km2, the probability of extinction was near zero. Patch extinction was also
highly related to patch isolation (figure 4.3B), far more so than to patch size. The mechanisms underlying recolonization of patches varied. These included recruitment from
dormant microscopic stages, which probably last no more than several months in field
conditions (Edwards 2000, Schiel and Foster 2006), spores derived from drifting adult
plants, or spore dispersal from extant patches of adults. Because of the vast numbers of
spores produced by established patches, it is probable that most recolonization of extinct

80

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

populations occurs through spore dispersal. Such dispersal involves complex physical
processes of transport (Denny and Gaylord 2010), the size of the spore source (Reed
et al. 1997), and, in the case of discrete patches, the distance separating them. Using
estimates of spore dispersal from a wide range of empirical studies and modeling, Reed
et al. (2006—“An experimental investigation”) found that the median dispersal distance of spores was about 40 m at one site and 400 m at another, with 10% of all spores
dispersing 1 km at one reef and 4 km at the other (figure 4.4). Distances between neighboring patches, averaged over the 418-month period, ranged from 0.5 to 14 km, but 80%
of patches were within 2 km of each other. In most cases, dispersal did not go beyond
20 m but in around 5% of cases dispersal was estimated to be more than 2 km (figure
4.4). The long tail on this distribution was greatly affected by currents and waves, two
of the most influential processes in dispersal. They found that the level of connectivity
among patches was only from 0.37% to 1.58%, depending on currents and inter-patch
distances. Combining all of the calculations, they found that in summer conditions 42%
of patches would exchange spores with at least one other patch along the coastline and
19% would exchange spores with no other patch.
This elaborate study highlights the highly dynamic nature of Macrocystis populations and the interaction of all factors over temporal scales from months to decades
and spatial scales from meters to kilometers. The conclusion was that environmental
variability in biotic and abiotic disturbances was the primary driver of extinction and
recolonization. They found that the great majority of recruitment failures (what they
termed “demographic stochasticity”) was short term and that connectivity via spores
was common. However, it seemed clear that many patches are near the limits of spore
dispersal from other patches, which highlights perhaps their vulnerability to prolonged
extinction should unfavorable conditions persist, such as through a changing climate.

R E PR O D U C TIVE O U TP U T AND S O UR CE S O F PR O PAGULE S

The preponderance of evidence appears to be that spores produced by attached plants
rather than from detached drifting plants are the major means of replenishment and
recolonization of giant kelp forests. This conclusion is based largely on the observations
that “drifters” tend not to persist for very long on inshore reefs where suitable habitat is
available, spores released from drifters at the surface are unlikely to reach the bottom,
and drifters tend to be somewhat ephemeral throughout the year. Furthermore, drifters
found along reefs tend to show a geometric decline in numbers away from source reefs.
For example, in southern California, Reed et al. (2004) found that beyond 1 km from
source reefs, there were fewer than 0.5 drifting Macrocystis plants per 100 m2 (figure
4.5), and over a 5-year period few of these lasted for even a few months. They concluded
that local dispersal of spores from drifters contributed very little to recruitment of giant
kelp among the reefs in their study. This is consistent with many other studies examining connectivity among populations. These studies do not preclude the possibility of

DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL, AND CONNECTIVITY OF POPULATIONS

•

81

Macrocystis density (no. • 100 m¯²)

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

Distance (km)
figure 4.5
Falloff of numbers of Macrocystis drifters, with distance from nearest natural source. Data are averages (±1 standard error) of drifters per square meter of bottom on San Clemente Artificial Reef in
southern California.
source: From Reed et al. (2004) reprinted with permission from Wiley & Sons Publishing.

dispersal of spores from drifting plants but they do indicate that this has a far lower
probability event than dispersal of spores from fi xed populations, especially on a local
scale or where the array of discrete patches allow “stepping stones” for dispersal along
a coastline. Given the abundance of drifters in some areas (Hobday 2000b, Macaya
et al. 2005) and the enormous spore production of single plants, even low-probability
long-range dispersal via drifters will have occurred, and this still seems the likely means
of the spread of giant kelp from the northern to southern hemisphere and across the
southern ocean (see Chapters 1 and 5).
Here, however, we consider the more frequent occurrence of dispersal within and
among populations in ecological time frames. The “black box” of spore production,
dispersal, and behavior of microscopic stages of kelp has been slowly prised open over
the past 25 years. Most of what we know about the development and potential longevity
of microscopic stages of kelp comes from laboratory studies on abiotic requirements
and their effects (see Chapter 3). For recruitment to occur in nature, there must be
an adequate supply, survival, and growth of these microscopic stages from the release

82

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

of spores, development of gametophytes, fertilization, and production of sporophytes.
Because of their small size and similarity to spores and fi laments of other brown algae,
giant kelp spores and gametophytes are extraordinarily hard to see or distinguish in
natural conditions, but innovative experiments and techniques, such as underwater
microscopes (Kennelly and Underwood 1984) and fluorescence (Graham 1999, Graham
and Mitchell 1999), have allowed both visualization in some conditions and a growing
understanding of how relevant processes operate on very small spatial scales. Unsurprisingly, it appears that the microscopic stages are influenced by as wide a range of
abiotic and biotic factors as the larger, visible stages, the difference being that they are
particularly challenging to work with.
As discussed in Chapter 3 on the abiotic environment, all processes of reproduction
and growth are greatly influenced by environmental factors. Furthermore, ecological
factors such as stand density and location affect sporophyte production and therefore
reproductive output of giant kelp. Macrocystis can be reproductively active year-round,
with individual plants having 3 × 1011 zoospores at a time (see Chapter 2). The influence of stand location, plant density, and biomass of individual plants was tested in a
multifactorial experiment in southern California. Reed (1987) selected two locations
near Santa Barbara, California, and in each place established two 25 × 25 m plots with
an average giant kelp density of about five plants per 10 m2. One plot in each place was
thinned to 0.3 plants per 10 m2 and the other left as a control. He then trimmed 75%
of fronds from five randomly selected plants within each plot to test how a reduction
in plant biomass might affect reproduction. This experiment allowed tests of location,
forest density, and plant biomass on reproductive output. As a proxy for reproduction,
he used the dry weight of sporophylls produced in each treatment on selected plants. He
first documented that there was a 99.5% correlation between sorus area and sporophyll
biomass, showing that the amount of sporophyll mass was a good indicator of reproductive output (provided that sori were equally productive of spores across treatments). He
found that the removal of vegetative fronds had a huge effect on reproduction by reducing sporophyll biomass by 80%. Reed surmised that the thinning of vegetative fronds
decreased the organic carbon translocated to sporophylls, thereby reducing fecundity.
Plant density had a significant effect on reducing reproductive output, but only at one
location. He attributed the differences to the degree of shading of canopies, rather than
to density per se. Fecundity is, however, a function of vegetative biomass (Neushul
1963). It decreases as vegetative biomass is reduced by storms or grazers (Reed 1987,
Graham 2002) and its recovery can lag behind vegetative recovery (Neushul 1963, Graham 2002). These studies, therefore, showed that the localized conditions affecting
stand density and frond density can have large effects on reproductive output.
It is known from numerous studies that the reproductive output of plants and forests
is prodigious, especially when considering that Macrocystis plants are reproductively
active year-round, but how this relates to the supply of spores and their variability was
unknown. Graham (2003) addressed this problem using a detailed study to test how

DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL, AND CONNECTIVITY OF POPULATIONS

•

83

tightly coupled propagule output and supply were in the Point Loma kelp forest. He
mapped giant kelp plants at different positions in the forest through most of a year,
using a visual assessment of sporophyte fertility to gauge when sori were absent,
present, and present and actively releasing spores; he categorized sporophyll “bundles”
as small or large. At each monthly sampling time, he used a plankton pump with the
nozzle a few centimeters above the substratum to collect released zoospores. In enumerating zoospores, he distinguished between those of Macrocystis and other kelps on the
basis of species-specific absorption spectra of plastids within zoospores obtained from
microphotometry (Graham 1999, Graham and Mitchell 1999). He found that zoospore
supply varied from 250 to 54,000 L −1, was greatest in March to April and declined to
low numbers from July onward. He determined there was a poor correlation between
“predicted” zoospore supply, based on his estimates of sporophyll production and condition, and actual supply. He concluded that current dampening within the kelp forest
retained zoospores, but that forest edges tended to experience unidirectional currents
that transported spores far from release sites, thereby decoupling local reproduction and
zoospore supply. His results emphasized the importance of population size, location of
release, and currents in the supply of zoospores.

S P O R E D I S P E R S A L A N D R E C R UI TME NT W IN D OW S

Given the vast reproductive output of giant kelp plants and forests, potentially numbering in the trillions, there is obviously a severe reduction in numbers through the
processes encompassing release of spores to production of microscopic sporophytes.
It could be assumed that in some way recruitment should be related to reproductive
output, and yet across ecology there are numerous examples where this is not the case
and where recruitment is more of a “lottery” (Sale 1978) or “sweepstakes” (Flowers et al.
2002). As shown in figure 4.6, landing on suitable substratum, avoiding other species,
not being eaten, and chemically affected are only some of the fi lters that decouple spore
production from recruitment. Importantly, it has long been noticed that recruitment
often occurs in discrete pulses that seem to be dictated largely by the abiotic environment around kelp forests. These “windows” of recruitment have been clarified both by
laboratory- and field-based experimental studies.
Beyond the basic requirement of blue light (400–500 nm) for gametogenesis to
occur (see Chapter 2), the total amount of light affects fertility. Lüning and Neushul
(1978) showed that 50% fertility of female gametophytes occurred at around 2.6 E m−2.
Similarly, Deysher and Dean (1984) found that 50% fertility in Macrocystis occurred at
5 μE m−2 s−1 and saturating irradiance at around 10 μE m−2 s−1. Furthermore, there is
an interaction between light, temperature, and nutrients that affects successful recruitment of kelp. For example, laboratory experiments by Lüning (1980) showed that the
total amount of light needed for gametogenesis in Laminaria increased exponentially
as temperature increased. A series of innovative field-based experiments quantified this

84

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

The Gauntlet of Macrocystis Microscopic Stages affected by
light, water, motion etc., that vary across space and time
Land on suitable substratum
– avoid other Laminarians on way down
– avoid branches of Articulated Corallines
– avoid space settled by other species
– avoid chemical inhibition by species
Produce spores

Grow to adult plant
– avoid removal by water motion
– avoid entanglement with own
species
– avoid competition with other
species
– avoid grazers

Grow to juvenile plant
affected by:
– density of own species
– density of other species nearby
– developing canopy
– grazers

Develop into gametophyte
– avoid overgrowth and shading by other
organisms
– avoid grazers
– small echinoids
– gastropods
– micro-crustacea
– other grazers
– avoid being buried and abraded by
sediments

–

Gametes locate Gametes
gametophytes ~ 1mm or less from s to
achieve fertilization

Grow to microscopic sporophyte
– avoid overgrowth and shading by
other organisms
– avoid grazers
– avoid sediments
figure 4.6
The fi lters of microscopic stages of Macrocystis in the field.
source: From Foster and Schiel (1985).

for Macrocystis. Dean et al. (1983) settled Macrocystis spores onto small ropes in the laboratory and grew them through to the gametophyte stage before outplanting them to the
field in southern California. They used in situ sensors and integrating recorders in the
site and then counted the densities of sporophytes that eventually appeared over many
different episodes of outplanting. They found there were threshold levels of light and
temperature required for the production of different densities of sporophytes, effectively
creating a window of recruitment (see figure 4.7). No sporophytes were produced above
17.6°C or below an irradiance level of 0.3 E m−2 day−1. Dense recruitment of >50 sporophytes per cm2 occurred when the temperature was below around 16.5°C and irradiance
above 0.4 E m−2 day−1. As temperatures approached 16°C, more light was required to

DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL, AND CONNECTIVITY OF POPULATIONS

•

85

- NO sporophyte recruitment

6
Mean irradiance
(Einsteins m¯² day¯¹)

= < 50 Sporophytes cm¯²
5

= > 50 Sporophytes cm¯²

4
3
2
1
0
12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Mean temperature (°C)
figure 4.7
“Windows” of recruitment of Macrocystis, relating density of sporophyte
recruits per square centimeter with respect to irradiance and temperature.
source: Data modified from field-based study of Deysher and Dean (1986a).

produce these high densities of sporophytes. Lower densities were produced between
16.5°C and 17.5°C regardless of light levels.
To refine these responses, further experiments by Deysher and Dean (1986b) were
done in the laboratory in a crossed experimental design using 7 irradiance levels and 10
temperatures. These lab results were at variance with the earlier field study. There was
no upper temperature threshold but instead nearly 100% sporophyte production from
fertile female gametophytes between 17°C and 20°C at high light levels. They speculated
that these differences from the field study were due to genetic variability among Macrocystis populations or to some factor correlated with temperature, such as nutrients. If
nutrients were constant and plentiful, as in the laboratory experiments, fertility could
stay high. However, temperature and nutrients are inversely correlated in natural conditions along coastlines (see Chapter 3) and so nutrients could be limiting for sporophyte
production at high temperatures in field situations.
The experiments of Tom Dean and Larry Deysher greatly clarified the interactions
of abiotic factors acting on microscopic stages of kelp and also provided a plausible
mechanistic explanation for at least some of the great variation in recruitment that
occurs in nature. Unfortunately, nature does not often come in convenient experimental units and therefore many other factors come into play in field situations. All of the
processes affecting spore release, survival, germination, fertilization, and production of
sporophytes are highly variable in nature. Macrocystis plants can become fertile in the
first year (Neushul 1963) and release spores throughout the year, although with peaks
occurring in early winter and in late spring—early summer (Anderson and North 1967,
Reed et al. 1996). Reed et al. (1996) found that reproduction and the standing stock

86

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

of spores of Macrocystis were positively correlated with the nitrogen content of plants
and negatively correlated with seawater temperature. They showed that spore release
was particularly poor during the 1991–1992 El Niño when temperatures were high and
nutrients very low. Furthermore, at least part of the variability of sporophyte production and recruitment is related to the density of settlement of spores. Spore settlement
must be >1 mm−2 so that female and male gametes are close enough for fertilization
(see Chapter 2).

ME CH ANI S M S O F D I S P E R S A L

Given the great sizes that Macrocystis can attain, their susceptibility to removal by
storms, and their capability of staying afloat and drifting, it seems intuitive that drifting adult plants are a major factor in dispersal and connectivity of populations. This
may be true over long time scales at great distances, and over evolutionary time scales,
such as the spread of Macrocystis between hemispheres (as discussed previously), but
on ecological time scales most of the evidence is to the contrary. Drifting plants, and
probably the great majority of Macrocystis plants that come adrift, are either cast ashore
(ZoBell 1971) or transported offshore. Many become entangled with attached plants
and remained within established beds for up to several months (Rosenthal et al. 1974,
Dayton et al. 1984). Reed et al. (2006—“An experimental investigation”) concluded,
however, that drifters do not provide a constant enough supply or an adequate residence
time of reproductive sporophylls sufficient to account for recruitment patterns seen
after disturbances (see earlier discussion).
Spore dispersal from attached plants, therefore, is the most likely source of recruits
within and among populations. We have already discussed how spore production is
influenced by the conditions of plants. Spores are tiny and their mobility has little if any
effect over the distances they can travel in the water column, although it may help in
microsite selection once they reach the bottom. The characteristics of the water column,
however, dictate the distance spores travel and the likelihood they will make contact
with the bottom.
Brian Gaylord and colleagues have provided much of what we know about dispersal
in kelps, particularly Macrocystis. The numerous forces acting on spores and affecting
dispersal across kelp forests were reviewed by Denny and Gaylord (2010) and Gaylord
et al. (2012; see figure 4.8). These operate spatially over orders of magnitude from submillimeter boundary layer conditions to currents or even ocean-wide processes over
many kilometers. Alongshore and tidal currents move within and across beds, but transport within the water column is influenced by stratification and internal waves. Because
spores are tiny, neutrally buoyant, and have high drag coefficients in water (Vogel 1994),
they sink slowly, if at all. Gaylord et al. (2002) found that Macrocystis spores sink at
around 0.001 mm sec−1 in seawater. Turbulent mixing is therefore required for them to
reach the bottom (Denny and Shibata 1989, McNair et al. 1997). Turbulent eddies are

DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL, AND CONNECTIVITY OF POPULATIONS

•

87

A

Individual kelp-level processes
Surface gravity waves

Current
damping and
wake effects

Currents
Turbulent
mixing

Internal
waves
Bottom shear

Macrocystis

B

Forest-level processes
Shore

Current attenuation
within bed

Kelp forest
Tidal currents

Horizontal mixing

C

Current acceleration
Propagating surface alongside bed
gravity and internal
waves

Among-forest processes
Shore

Recirculation
zones

Exchange
between beds
Drift kelp
Coastal boundary layer
figure 4.8
Transport and mixing processes influencing kelp forests at various scales. (A) Fluid dynamic processes operating at the level of, or in the vicinity of, individual kelps. (B) Larger-scale phenomenon that
influence entire forests. (C) Oceanographic factors that drive exchange of propagules and materials
among kelp forests.
source: From Gaylord et al. (2012).

constrained near the seafloor and the spatial dimension of fluid motion is greater in the
water column. Together, these hydrodynamic processes, interacting to some extent with
the sinking speed of propagules and their release height above the substratum, determine the distance that spores travel, the proportion and numbers that are transported
out of a kelp forest, and the probability they will settle somewhere else.
Spores behave as passive particles at scales greater than a few millimeters in moving
seawater (Graham 2003). They do not have an obligate period of development, such as
occurs in most marine propagules in the plankton, and can settle, attach, and begin to
develop immediately after release (Santelices 1990). The swimming behavior of spores
most likely aids in microsite selection as spores go through the benthic boundary layer
near the bottom, and in settlement. They respond positively to nutrients, which can
stimulate them to settle (Amsler and Neushul 1990) and can exhibit rheotaxis (response
to water movement) and thigmotaxis (contact with surfaces) (Santelices 1990, Fletcher
and Callow 1992). These behaviors probably help in concentrating spore settlement in
appropriate microsites, leading to an increased success rate of gametophyte development and fertilization.
Frictional forces near the seafloor alter the flows produced by currents and waves,
which results in a boundary layer of reduced velocity near the bottom (Gaylord et al.
2012; see figure 4.8). Turbulent eddies in the water column bring the neutrally buoyant
spores into contact with the boundary layer and enable them to be in a position to settle
(Gaylord et al. 2002, 2004, 2012, Denny and Gaylord 2010). The forces acting on spores,
however, are complicated. Vertical mixing determines whether or not spores reach
the bottom and how long they remain in the water column, and horizontal currents affect how far they are carried after release (Gaylord et al. 2002, 2007, Gaylord
et al. 2006a, 2006b). Under most circumstances, it is probable that the vast majority
of spores that reach the bottom do so within around 100 m of source plants (Gaylord et
al. 2006b).
Dispersal distances are modulated by the size and reproductive output of forests,
the duration of spore viability, and current speeds. In several experiments, for example, Gaylord et al. (2006b) tested dispersal around mature giant kelp plants that were
outplanted on concrete blocks and acted as a source of spores, and checked for spore
settlement on microscopic slides placed up to 120 m away in four directions. From these
experiments, supported by modeling, they found that the modal dispersal distance from
spores released from solitary plants was around 1 m and, therefore, the combination of
dispersal kernels from many plants in a kelp forest causes high settlement within the
forest. They concluded that this effect probably magnifies the strong density dependence seen in kelp forest dynamics (Reed 1990b, Reed et al. 1991). Clearly, turbulence
and wave-driven processes dominated local spore transport, and currents dominated
longer dispersal.
Gaylord et al. (2002) distinguished between “dispersal potential” and “colonization potential.” The distinction is the difference between “getting there” and “being

DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL, AND CONNECTIVITY OF POPULATIONS

•

89

effective.” Dispersal potential is indexed by the spatial scales over which propagules
are carried, which is considerably different from the spatial scales over which successful establishment is possible. Spore clouds usually go through turbulent stirring
and stretching after release and later undergo mixing through horizontal transport by
orbital wave motion (Gaylord et al. 2012). Given a discrete source of propagules, either
from a forest or from isolated individuals, there is a dilution effect and therefore a great
decline in the density of spores with increasing distance. This greatly diminishes the
chances they will settle in densities great enough to achieve the proximity required
for fertilization to occur. However, multiple releases of spores over short time periods
may increase the density of spores to the necessary densities (Reed et al. 1997). Gaylord et al. (2006b) showed that colonization via fertilization and recruitment can occur
at least 1 km from the nearest source plants. This is a product of current speed, the
size of forests and therefore spore supply, and the duration of viability of spores and
gametophytes. However, dispersal and recruitment within kelp forests are much more
probabilistic events.

S E E D B ANK S

The shower of spores from giant kelp can provide a “bank of microscopic forms” (Chapman 1986) on the seafloor, but there is some debate about several aspects of its nature
and longevity in a kelp forest, including whether it is truly analogous to a terrestrial seed
bank. The term “seed bank” is well known and long established in terrestrial ecology. It
starts as a “seed rain” as an inoculum for populations. “The store of seeds buried in the
soil (the seed bank) is composed in part of seeds produced in the area and partly of seeds
blown in from elsewhere”; seeds are in a dormant condition and they await adequate
conditions before they germinate, which may take many years (Harper 1977). Analogies with marine seaweeds are obvious. There is no uncertainty about whether or not
massive numbers of microscopic stages of marine plants can occur in marine habitats,
but there are questions about their spatial variability, duration, and which microscopic
stages are capable of delayed development and can still go on to produce viable 2N plants
(see reviews by Hoffmann and Santelices 1991, Carney and Edwards 2006, Schiel and
Foster 2006). If “storage” is simply defined as delayed or prolonged development, then
some storage of microscopic stages undoubtedly occurs in large brown algae, but it is
different from terrestrial seed banks. In annual seaweeds, prolonged development of
microscopic stages is crucial to population dynamics because macroscopic plants may
be absent for several months of the year (Dayton 1973, McConnico and Foster 2005,
Schiel and Thompson 2012), while in perennial species, there is frequent large-scale
loss of plants from grazing, severe water motion, and other abiotic stresses (Dayton
et al. 1992, Underwood 1999). Unlike seeds, however, large brown algal propagules
have no protective structures, although a possible exception is Saito’s (1975) observation
of Undaria pinnatifida gametophytes forming thick-walled “resting stages” at high tem-

90

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

peratures. Furthermore, kelp propagules have no known innate dormancy, are far more
transitory than most seeds, and the surrounding medium offers none of the protection
afforded seeds in terrestrial soils. Rather than true dormancy, algal propagules simply appear able to delay or prolong development when conditions are unfavorable. The
abiotic requirements for gametophyte development, gametogenesis, and sporophyte
production in kelp were discussed in Chapters 2 and 3. Here we consider studies that
explicitly tested delayed development within the context of assessing potential banks of
microscopic stages.
Kelp gametophytes in culture can live for many months (possibly years; see Gametophytes in Chapter 2) and then complete gametogenesis if returned to optimal conditions, and the growth of microscopic sporophytes can also be delayed. However, the
evidence of this occurring in nature is mostly conjectural. For example, disturbances
from ENSO events often remove virtually all of the adult Macrocystis plants from sites.
In sites at the extreme southern limit of Macrocystis distribution in Mexico, Ladah et al.
(1999) found no adult plants over a period of at least 7 months from autumn (October
1997) onward during El Niño conditions and yet new recruits appeared in the following summer. Because the nearest adult populations were believed to be >100 km away,
they surmised that recruitment was from resident micro-stages. However, Ladah and
Zertuche-González (2004) found that during this El Niño, some Macrocystis adults survived in deeper water (25 m), although their surface fronds died down to 15 m depth, and
may have been the source of subsequent recruitment.
Most of what is known about delayed development in giant kelp is from laboratory
experiments, which have produced varying results. As discussed in Chapter 3, it has
long been known that gametophytes can survive and grow for long periods in culture.
However, there have been several tests to determine if these stages will have continued
growth and development after being exposed to initially poor conditions of light and
nutrients and then returned to adequate conditions. Both Kinlan et al. (2003) and Ladah
and Zertuche-González (2007) found that growth of gametophyte stages could be
delayed for 1–2 months when put into low-light and nutrient-poor conditions. However,
when gametophytes were returned to normal light and adequate nutrients, they grew but
did not complete gametogenesis and go on to produce sporophytes. Carney and Edwards
(2010) put spores into low-light and low-nutrient conditions (10 μm photons m−2 sec−1,
<1 μmol L −1 of nitrate) and after 74 days transferred them to a series of treatments of
adequate light and nutrients, which included nitrate, phosphate, trace elements, and
vitamins. They found that growth occurred, although it was slow, when no nitrate was
present, but that all nutrients were required for sporophyte production. Furthermore,
when good conditions became available, sporophytes were produced within 14–24 days
of receiving nutrients, compared to 54–96 days for nondelayed gametophytes. They
concluded that one- to two-cell gametophytes of giant kelp can delay vegetative growth
and reproduction for several months during low nutrient periods. They argued that
the difference between their results and those of Kinlan et al. (2003) and Ladah and

DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL, AND CONNECTIVITY OF POPULATIONS

•

91

Zertuche-González (2007) was that delayed gametophytes in their experiments had
first been exposed to good conditions before delay was introduced with poor conditions,
which might have affected their reproductive potential. Later experiments by Carney
(2011) and Carney et al. (2013) corroborated earlier experiments in delayed development
for the microscopic stages of several kelp species.
Laboratory studies provide some interesting insights into potential mechanisms of
delayed growth and development of gametophytes and microscopic sporophytes, and
offer clues about how these early life stages respond and survive in natural field conditions. For example, Deysher and Dean (1984, 1986b) found that these stages were relatively short-lived in the field. They found that densities of microscopic sporophytes on
experimentally outplanted substrata seeded with Macrocystis spores peaked at around
40 days and then declined. The studies of Reed et al. (1997) further clarified many of
the complexities relating to potential dormancy of microscopic life stages in natural
conditions. Macrocystis can reproduce year-round and they found a high degree of reproductive synchrony during around half of their sampling periods over 2 years. These
episodes of spore release varied from 1 week to 2 months. They placed rocks into a kelp
forest and found no differences in recruitment on these and control rocks that had been
in the kelp forest throughout the experiment. They concluded that Macrocystis had little capacity for dormancy and the vast majority of recruits come from recently settled
spores. The work of Reed et al. (1997) does not preclude the possibility of some delayed
development, but this is most likely unimportant when adult plants are nearby and
actively releasing spores. Furthermore, their previous experiments on settled spores
outplanted to the field showed that the vast majority of gametophytes died during their
first week after settlement (Reed et al. 1988, 1994) and that only embryonic sporophytes,
and not gametophytes, were found after 3 weeks. However, Carney et al. (2013) made the
case for delayed development of gametophytes in the field. They cleared substrata within
kelp forests by bleaching the bottom, thereby removing all algae, including their microstages. They found that this delayed kelp recruitment by around 2 months relative to
controls. From these results, previous laboratory results on delayed development in kelp
gametophytes, and population genetic analyses, they argued for “gametophyte banks”
lasting at least 2–7 months. Although well argued, their conclusions were inferential
and not based on direct observations of micro-stage development in the field. It is possible, however, that given particular conditions, any micro-stage may undergo delayed
development and produce viable recruits.
Given the numerous intrinsic and extrinsic factors that affect early life stages, including grazing, scour, sediment, temperature stress, shading, and overgrowth (Vadas et al.
1992), the ability of micro-stages to persist for very long periods in adverse benthic conditions is probably not great. However, there remain several gaps in our understanding
of how long these microscopic stages may persist in nature, the relative contributions
of older versus younger stages to juvenile plant abundance, and, after disturbances of
various degrees, how these contribute to population replenishment and persistence in

92

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

such variable environments. Direct field-based observations and perhaps new genetic
techniques for identifying species-specific microscopic stages may assist in this regard
(Fox and Swanson 2007). In the meantime, it is not particularly fruitful to pursue inappropriate analogies to terrestrial seed banks but to simply consider these algal stages as
what they are, microscopic plants.

G E NE T I C S TR U C T U R E O F P O P U L AT I O N S

Because the vast majority of giant kelp spores fall within tens of meters of adult plants
and there is a long tail to the dispersal distances of spores, populations are likely to
be composed of a combination of plants originating from inbreeding, crossbreeding
within populations, and crossbreeding among discrete kelp patches. Knowledge about
the genetic structure of populations can therefore shed light on the relative probabilities of these events within kelp patches and help corroborate empirical and theoretical
models on dispersal and population structure. The development of “DNA fingerprints”
(Coyer et al. 1994, Macaya and Zuccarello 2010a) and microsatellite markers (Alberto
et al. 2009) for Macrocystis is beginning to lead to a greater understanding of how
reproduction biology and dispersal of kelp spores influence the genetic structure of
populations over different scales.
Within giant kelp populations, Raimondi et al. (2004) evaluated the costs of selffertilization. These costs result from inbreeding depression and can be seen in reduced
survival, poor growth, and low fecundity. They postulated that there was a great potential
for self-fertilization in giant kelp because the vast majority of spores fall near parent plants.
To test inbreeding effects, they established laboratory populations with three mixtures of
different ratios of sibling to nonsibling spores from 20 sporophytes. These yielded selfed
zygote cultures of 100%, 50%, and 5%. They then used similar mixtures seeded onto
natural rocks placed into a field site. They found there was a linear decrease in production
of viable zygotes across the treatments, with the outcrossed mixture producing 40% more
than the 100% mixture. However, there was no evidence of self-incompatibility. In the
field trial, the densities of sporophytes were sampled three times over a year. They found
that sporophyte abundance varied inversely with the level of self-fertilization. After 1 year,
when plants were >10 m tall, densities were around 40% and 20% lower in the two selfing
treatments (100% and 50%, respectively) compared to the outcrossed (5%) treatment. Furthermore, only 15% of the fully selfed plants became reproductive, compared to around
50% in the other two treatments, which also yielded 10 times greater sorus area than in
the fully selfed plants. Gaylord et al. (2006b) estimated that selfing levels in the order of
10% may occur, based on dispersal distance and adult spacing. Raimondi et al. (2004)
concluded that the costs of self-fertilization are extremely high and may be exacted when
spore dispersal is limited, such as on isolated reefs in low current flow. They speculated
that localized extinction of giant kelp is a potential result of inbreeding, but this has not
yet been considered in the dynamics of kelp populations.

DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL, AND CONNECTIVITY OF POPULATIONS

•

93

In a study along the coast of southern California, Alberto et al. (2010) tested the
effects of geographic distance and habitat continuity on population genetic differentiation in giant kelp populations, using highly variable microsatellite markers for polymorphic loci developed by Alberto et al. (2009). They specifically tested the hypothesis of
isolation by distance (IBD; Wright 1943), arguing that giant kelp populations were good
models for this type of study because of the almost linear array of kelp patches at various
distances apart along the coastline in the study area of the Santa Barbara Channel. They
used GIS data of kelp surface canopies to estimate habitat continuity and geographic
distances among pairs of sites. They then generated a matrix of geographic distances
between all pairs of sites, and a matrix of kelp area per kilometer of coastline between
all pairs of sites as an estimate of habitat continuity. They sampled 50 giant kelp plants
from each of nine sites and genotyped them for 12 microsatellite loci. They found a
high level of genetic diversity in the Santa Barbara Channel populations. The number
of alleles per locus ranged from 7 to 50, and within a single population from 2 to 27.
They found there was a steep increase in genetic differentiation in the eastern part of the
study area where there was low kelp abundance at two sites. The best model of genetic
distance and habitat variables showed that genetic distance increased as geographic
distance increased (figure 4.9), and that genetic distance decreased as habitat continuity
increased. Therefore, there were counteracting effects of distance and habitat continuity on genetic distance of the giant kelp populations. Using IBD simulation modeling,
they found that the mean dispersal distance ranged from 1.8 to 2.9 km and from 0.6
to 0.7 km at high and low current velocities, respectively, which was consistent with
the empirical results of Reed et al. (2004), and the physical transport model of Gaylord
et al. (2006b), indicating that the scales of connectivity up to around 1 km were representative of most kelp forests. Their calculations of effective population size were only
0.2–9.6% of the empirically derived population size, which they argued agrees with
those of other marine organisms with high rates of fecundity and juvenile mortality
and high variance in reproductive success. They concluded that both geographic distance and habitat continuity are important factors operating independently to influence
genetic distance and that the discrete kelp patches serve as stepping stones in the IBD
model. They highlight that the consequences of habitat fragmentation on the metapopulation structure of giant kelp are likely to be severe.
Alberto et al. (2011) extended this work on the isolation by distance model by testing
how much additional variability in genetic differentiation could be accounted for when
transport time was added as a predictor. They examined the degree to which gene flow
depended on seasonal ocean circulation, the asymmetrical nature of flows between
sites, and the direction of connectivity based on an oceanographic model and genetic
assignment tests. They noted that over demographically relevant scales, ocean currents
tended to flow primarily in one direction, which affects gene flow between sites. They
reanalyzed the data set of Alberto et al. (2009, 2010). They then used a Regional Oceanic Modeling System (ROMS) model for the Southern California Bight (Dong and

94

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

Genetic differentiation [Fst /(1–Fst)]

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01
r ² = 0.65

0.00
0.010

0.015

0.020

0.025

0.030

0.035

0.040

Minimum oceanographic distance in June + Habitat continuity
figure 4.9
Two-factor regression model using minimum transport time and habitat continuity, as independent variables, to predict genetic differentiation in Macrocystis in the Santa Barbara Channel, southern California.
notes: Fst = a measure of genetic differentiation. Minimum oceanographic distance + Habitat continuity =
a combination of minimum distance among pairs of sites and kelp forest area per kilometer of linear
coastline.
source: From Alberto et al. (2011), reprinted with permission from Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

McWilliams 2007, Dong et al. 2009) to calculate transport times for a Lagrangian particle (i.e., one borne by water movement) to travel from a source to a destination site,
using all pairs of 135 nearshore kelp patches.
They found that transport in the Santa Barbara Channel was primarily westward
except during winter when around half of the flows were in the opposite direction.
Combining their models and genetic analyses, they found that by incorporating oceanographic transport times between giant kelp patches, they nearly doubled the amount
of genetic variation accounted for by geographic distance. One of their interesting conclusions was that they found little support for the notion that rafting sporophytes were
a major source of dispersal. This was based on them finding the greatest explanatory
power using summer transport times, especially during June when plants are highly
reproductive but also when dislodgement of giant kelp is lowest. They also found that

DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL, AND CONNECTIVITY OF POPULATIONS

•

95

habitat continuity, one of the two predictors of Alberto et al. (2010), added only 6% more
explanatory power to the best-fit model, although they also noted that transport times
incorporate habitat features such as direction and duration of transport. Overall, they
found strong support for ocean currents being a primary driver of population connectivity of giant kelp. This is not surprising, given the results of an increasing number of
empirical and modeling studies on spore transport and recruitment dynamics, but this
genetic verification of underlying structure and mechanisms is an important advance
in understanding the population dynamics of giant kelp.
On a wider geographic scale, the relatedness of populations offers intriguing insights
into the spread and colonization of giant kelp over long time periods. For example, Coyer
et al. (2001) examined not only the evolution of Macrocystis (discussed in Chapter 1) but also
the relatedness of populations in both hemispheres, using the noncoding rDNA internal
transcribed spacer regions (ITS1 and ITS2). From their analyses, they inferred a northernto-southern hemisphere dispersal of giant kelp because northern individuals were more
diverse and had paraphyletic clades, but those in the south were less diverse and formed
a monophyletic clade. They surmised that dispersal of giant kelp between hemispheres
involved populations around Baja California, Mexico, and / or those around Catalina Island
off southern California as the bridging or intermediate sources. They found little divergence in ITS sequences in southern hemisphere plants despite the vast distances between
populations, probably due to kelp rafting in the strong flows of the West Wind Drift. They
also found a strongly resolved Australia / Tasmania clade within the monophyletic southern
hemisphere clade, indicating less gene flow between there and the rest of the southern
hemisphere. Transport away from the coast in this region may be limited because of coastal
currents and very low nitrate levels for sustaining kelp rafts, resulting in reduced gene flow
between Tasmania and New Zealand across the Tasman Sea (Edgar 1987).
Knowledge about southern hemisphere populations and relatedness was expanded
greatly by the extensive studies of Macaya and Zuccarello (2010a, 2010b) who examined the genetic structure of Macrocystis across the south Pacific region. They analyzed
770 samples using mitochondrial DNA and single-strand conformation polymorphism.
Across the entire region they found seven haplotypes, five of which were along the 4800 km
Chilean-Peru coastline (figure 4.10). One genetic break in haplotypes occurred at 42° S on
Chiloe Island, Chile, which corresponded with a known biogeographic boundary. However,
another genetic break at 33° S in central / northern Chile did not correspond to a known
boundary for brown algae, although it was in line with some other marine taxa. However,
this latitude is also the demarcation of ecomorphs, with Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ occurring to
the south and M. ‘integrifolia’ to the north, representing potential adaptations to warmer
environmental conditions (Graham, Vásquez, et al. 2007, Demes et al. 2009).
Their results shed light on several potential processes. Long-distance dispersal via
floating kelp is probably important over long time periods. They also noted that during
the last glacial maximum (LGM, See Chapter 1) broad areas of southern Chile, including
the fiords, were covered by ice sheets. In line with the conclusions of Fraser et al. (2009,

96

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

15º

20º

A

B

Peruvian
province

10ºs

Mpyr2
247

Paracas
Atico

Mpyr1
269

San Marcos
Rio Seco
Chipana

Mpyr5
5

Mpyr4
15

Mpyr3
194

C. Constitucion

25º

45º

50º

Canel Baker
Canel Picton

0

55º

500
km

Puntas
Arenas

Central Chile
CC Southern
Chile
Campbell Is

A

Antipodes Is

New
Zealand

Falkland
Is
South Georgia Is

Enderby Is

Macquire Is

Antarctica

CC

AC
C

40º

Magellan
province

35º

Intermediate
area

30º

Peru
Northern Chile

C

A

Playa Blanca
Los Vilos
Totoralillo
Pichicuy
La Castilla
Matanzas
Duao
Tumbes
Quidico
Loncoyen
Los Molinos
Metri
Ancud
Pumillahue
Curaco
Achao
Quellon

Marion Is

Mpyr2
247
Mpyr5
Mpyr6
8
Mpyr7
11

Mpyr1
274

Mpyr4 5
15
Mpyr3
206

figure 4.10
Distribution of giant kelp genetic diversity (haplotypes) along the Southeastern Pacific coast, subantarctic
islands and New Zealand.
(A) Southeastern Pacific coast showing location of collecting sites. Different shadings represent different haplotypes designated as Mpyr1-5 in (B). Gray lines represent biogeographic breaks. Province names differ from those
used in Chapter 5.
(B) Statistical parsimony network showing mutational pathways among haplotypes. Cross lines represent
number of single-site substitutions. Numbers below haplotypes are a measure of haplotype frequency.
(C) Collecting sites and haplotypes in the subantarctic islands and New Zealand with additional haplotypes
Mpyr 6-7. Inset is the parsimony network using the entire data set with cross lines and numbers below haplotypes as in (B).
ACC = Antarctic Circumpolar Current.
source: From Macaya and Zuccarello (2010b).

2010) for the large fucoid Durvillaea antarctica, they speculated that shared genotypes
of giant kelp between southern Chile and other SE Pacific regions may reflect ice scour
during the LGM. The distribution of one haplotype corresponds precisely to the extent
of the Patagonian ice sheet and subsequent recolonization from transoceanic sources.
They surmised that the Antarctic Circumpolar Current may have facilitated recolonization after the LGM through drifting kelp rafts.

DEMOGRAPHY, DISPERSAL, AND CONNECTIVITY OF POPULATIONS

•

97

With the advent of new genetic markers and new techniques, our knowledge of the
genetic structure of kelp populations is still at an early stage. We will no doubt add to
this emerging picture in the future, as new markers and techniques are developed and
as we combine genetic, ecological, and oceanographic data of giant kelp forests across
the vast regions they occupy.

This chapter on demography, dispersal, and connectivity concludes our discussion of
the population biology of giant kelp. In going through the literature, it was evident
that we have made enormous strides over the past 25 years in understanding kelp forest dynamics and the intimate relationship they have with the physical environment.
The underlying themes of continual disturbances and replenishment come through
strongly, which is unusual for a plant so large and dominant of its habitat. When considering its population biology across the spatial and temporal domains it occupies, there
truly is no terrestrial analogue of Macrocystis.

98

•

THE BIOLOGY OF GIANT KELP

PART II

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

This page intentionally left blank

5
GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES
To those whose experience with kelp beds has been confined to observations
only of the surface, all beds look very much alike, but divers having seen
Macrocystis in a number of localities state that no two beds have quite the
same aspect. The differences, indeed, are so pronounced from place to place
that one finds it difficult to diagram a generalized kelp bed.
—Dawson et al. (1960)

These species have evolved along unique paths, reminding us again that
extrapolation of results from one geographic area to another is unwarranted
even when physical conditions are similar.
—Moreno and Sutherland (1982)

Areas with giant kelp include a multitude of other species. Because giant kelp is usually
dominant, however, is the most visually obvious species, and commonly has by far the
greatest biomass, such areas are called giant kelp communities. They are also called
giant kelp “forests” or kelp “beds.” Between these terms we prefer “forests” to “beds”
because it highlights the vertical structure in the water column and the surface canopy.
The abundance of giant kelp varies considerably across areas, and adults may become
temporarily absent for many reasons, such as the population being annual, or being
removed by grazers, storms, or other episodic oceanographic events. We consider such
temporal variation a characteristic of giant kelp communities that does not necessarily
represent “phase shifts,” “alternative stable states,” or some other fundamental community change. “Community” can also imply a particular suite of species consistently
associated with the dominant species, but this not the case even at local scales for Macrocystis, as the quote above from Dawson et al. (1960) indicates. Furthermore, given that
Macrocystis occurs in both hemispheres across many different biogeographic provinces,
there is clearly no single community of giant kelp across the regions it occupies. For
example, considering only the South American coastline, giant kelp is distributed over
two biogeographic provinces and eight ecoregions (figure 1.5) defined largely by the
presence of distinct floras and faunas (Spalding et al. 2007).

10 1

While there are various arguments for and against the value of “community” as an
ecological unit (e.g., Underwood 1986, Lawton 1999, Simberloff 2004), it seems to us
that community studies are essential in providing a descriptive record of Macrocystis
and its associated populations in one or more places at one or more times, and commonly including physical / chemical assessments, natural history observations, and
experiments that provide insights into species’ interactions. The accumulated information from such studies has been an enormous contribution to kelp forest science by
providing the basis for model building and hypothesis testing. Moreover, giant kelp
communities can vary at a scale of a few kilometers, so knowledge of local communities
and the factors that affect them is essential for effective management. This has proved
to be the case in many areas of the world where the status of giant kelp forests and their
associated species have underpinned coastal management because of their natural, recreational, and societal value. Here we will use “community” in a purely descriptive or
ecographic sense indicating the populations that occur in particular places and times, as
defined by the investigator, but we knit the various studies together, along with broaderscale efforts, to examine generalities. Primary productivity and energy flow are also
discussed, along with “who eats what” food webs; an examination of the wider causes
and consequences of trophic interactions is reserved for other sections.

A “ COMP O S ITE ” CO MM UNIT Y

The best-described Macrocystis forests are those that occur in the subtidal zone and are
usually composed of Macrocystis ‘pyrifera.’ Although a very wide range of species can
occur with giant kelp, we are unaware of any macroorganisms whose associations with
giant kelp are obligate; they can be found in other kelp communities and on subtidal
rocky reefs devoid of large brown algae (e.g., Pequegnat 1964). It is important to note,
however, that most descriptions are based on what is visible to the naked eye, and we
know little about a potentially rich microscopic community associated with giant kelp.
With those caveats in mind and to give a general idea of the structure of a kelp forest,
figure 5.1 illustrates a “composite” California Macrocystis forest with emphasis on the
large, visually obvious kelps that provide much of the structure of the community and for
which we have the most descriptive information. The figure divides the community into
habitats where particular organisms typically co-occur in California. It is a composite
because of local variation in species’ distributions and because the geographic ranges of
some the organisms, such as sea otters (Enhydra lutris) and elk kelp (Pelagophycus porra),
do not presently overlap. The figure indicates the potential complexity of the community,
with multiple layers of vegetation (e.g., Dawson et al. 1960), over 50 species of fishes that
commonly segregate into various habitats (e.g., Quast 1971b, Ebeling et al. 1980), and
numerous invertebrates also found in particular habitats within the forest. North (1971a)
listed 130 species of plants and almost 800 species of animals associated with giant
kelp forests in southern California and northern Baja California, Mexico, although all

102

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

A

B

1 mm

1 cm

Z1

4
1m

Z2

3
2

Z3
C

E

D

1

20 cm

20 cm
10 cm

figure 5.1
Cross section showing the inhabitants of a generalized M. ‘pyrifera’ forest in California. The numbers
to the left designate vegetation layers: (1) small fi lamentous species and nongeniculate coralline
algae; (2) bottom canopy plants including foliose red and brown algae, and geniculate corallines;
(3) understory canopy kelps; (4) mid-water and surface canopy kelps such as Macrocystis, Nereocystis,
Pelagophycus, and Egregia, and the fucoid Stephanocystis. Three broad zonal associations are common:
Z1 inshore, Z2 within, and Z3 below the distribution of giant kelp. Various subhabitat associations
are indicated within the circles: A = plankton in the water column (phytoplankton and zooplankton);
B = animals associated with the surface of Macrocystis and other seaweeds including bryozoans,
spirorbid polychaetes, and isopods (shown) as well as other crustaceans and molluscs; C = organisms
characteristic of vertical surfaces (primarily sessile animals such as sponges, tunicates, bryozoans,
sea anemones, and solitary corals); D = organisms characteristic of horizontal surfaces (sea stars, sea
urchins, benthic fishes, algae); E = animals in giant kelp holdfasts (brittle stars, crustaceans, polychaetes [shown on the outside but which occupy spaces within the holdfast]).
notes: Various fishes occur in the water column, and birds (e.g., cormorants), seals, and sea otters forage in
the water column and at the sea surface. Some of the organisms depicted here do not co-occur at any one site.
source: From Foster and Schiel (1985).

of them are not found together in any single kelp forest. For example, Pearse and Lowry
(1974) listed 369 species of algae and invertebrates in central California compared to
North’s (1971a) total of 631 species of the same groups in all of southern and Baja California. The fauna in giant kelp holdfasts, the subject of the first kelp forest research using
air supply diving in California (Andrews 1945), can include over 150 taxa (Ghelardi 1971).
A few birds and mammals forage in the community, including cormorants, harbor seals,
sea otters, and large elephant seals. California gray whales may cruise through forests
feeding on crustaceans. Forests are embedded in a planktonic assemblage of mostly
microscopic organisms, some of which are early stages in the life histories of larger
members of the community. Sampling at one site in central California has also revealed
a diverse, temporally variable bacterial assemblage on giant kelp blades. The phyla were
similar to those in the surrounding water but distinct at lower taxonomic levels. Several
of the blade bacteria were similar to those known to inhibit the settlement of larvae and
growth of other bacteria (Michelou et al. 2013).
Subtidal giant kelp communities generally occur within a fairly narrow depth range.
Even if suitable substrata are available, M. ‘pyrifera’ usually does not occur shallower
than about 5 m and deeper than around 20 m. Shallower and deeper areas, as well as
hard substrata under the canopy of giant kelp, are often inhabited by other kelps, many
of which provide subcanopies or even surface canopies. We illustrate (figures 5.2 and
5.3) and discuss below several of these kelp forests by biogeographic provinces as defined
by Briggs (1974) and further elaborated by Spalding et al. (2007). The forests discussed
were selected on the basis of available data and to illustrate the range of variation within
and among provinces. The emphasis is on large, abundant benthic organisms.

VA R I ATI O N BY B I O GE O G R A P H I C P R OV IN C E
WA RM T EMPER AT E N O R T HE A S T PACIFI C

•

Northern Pacific Baja California

to Southern California

Giant kelp forests are a ubiquitous feature of shallow rocky reefs along the 1000 km
of coast and offshore islands from their southern limit at Punta San Hipólito, Bahía
Asunción, Baja California (26.90° N, 113.98° W) to Point Conception, California (34.48°
N, 120.56° W; figure 1.5). The southern limit is 300 km north of the southern end of
the province at Bahía Magdalena, but Macrocystis occurs well north of the northern
provincial limit. Kelp forests at their southern limit in the northern hemisphere are
noteworthy because they occur in an increasingly subtropical environment where temperatures typically range from 14°C to 22°C (Hernández-Carmona et al. 2001). They
generally are most prominent on the south–southeast sides of rocky points or shallow
coastal shelves where upwelling decreases water temperatures and increases nutrients
(Dawson 1951, Zaytsev et al. 2003). Low nutrients and severe storms associated with El
Niño events depress upwelling and can increase storms, resulting in the complete loss
of Macrocystis sporophytes (Edwards 2004). Moreover, the most southerly forests are

1 04

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

A. Bahía Asunción

0m

10 m
8.

6. 7.
2.
1.

9.
3.

4.

5.
20 m

1. Sand
2. Geniculate corallines (BC)
Dictyota flabellulata (BC)
3. Sessile Animals
4. Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ (SCK)

5. Eisenia arborea (UK)
6. Megastraea undosa (gastropod)
7. Phyllospadix (surf grass)
8. Haliotis spp. (abalone)
9. Panulirus interruptus (lobster)

B. Point Loma
0m

9.

10.

11.

12.
10 m

8.
4.

5.

6. 7.

20 m
30 m

3.
1. 2.
1. Pelagophycus porra (SCK)
2. Laminaria farlowii (UK)
3. Lophogorgia chilensis (gorgonid)
4. Geniculate Corallines (BC)
Rhodymenia spp. (BC)
5. Patiria miniata (sea star)
6. Pterygophora californica (UK)

40 m
7. Haliotis spp. (abalone)
8. Strongylocentrotus spp. (sea urchins)
9. Panulirus interruptus (lobster)
10. Egregia menziesii (SCK)
11. Stephanocystis osmundacea (SCF fucoid)
12. Phyllospadix spp. (surf grass)

figure 5.2
Distribution of conspicuous plants and animals found in five giant kelp forests (A–E) across the
range of Macrocystis in the northern hemisphere.
BC = bottom canopy; SCF = surface canopy fucoid; SCK = surface canopy kelp; UF = understory fucoid;
UK = understory kelp.
notes: The symbols in Panel A for sand (1), sessile animals (3), and Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ (4) are generic to
all figures unless otherwise noted. Organisms and horizontal axes are not to scale. Depth distribution is
indicated on the right.

C. Arroyo Quemado

0m

7.

1.

2.

9.

10.

4.

15 m

1. Strongylocentrotus spp.
(sea urchins)
2. Rhodymenia californica (BC)
Chondracanthus
corymbiferus (BC)
3. Pterygophora californica (UK)
4. Diopatra ornata (polychaete)
5. Megastraea undosa (gastropod)

D. Stillwater Cove

8m

6.

5.
3.

8.

6. Patiria miniata (sea star)
Pisaster giganteus (sea star)
7. Panulirus interruptus (lobster)
8. Egregia menziesii (SCK)
9. Corallina chilensis
(geniculate coralline)
10. Phyllospadix torreyi (surf grass)

9.
0m
8.
5. 6. 7.

4.
2.

3.

10 m

20 m

30 m
1.
1. Calliarthron spp. (BC)
Plocamium cartilagineum (BC)
2. Pterygophora californica (UK)
3. Boulders
4. Patiria miniata (sea star)
figure 5.2 continued

5. Stephanocystis osmundacea (SCF fucoid)
6. Egregia menziesii (SCK)
7. Laminaria setchellii (UK)
8. Macrocystis ‘integrifolia’ (SCK)
9. Enhydra lutris (sea otter)

E. British Columbia
0m

10.

11.

3m

7. 8. 9.
6.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6m

1.
1. Boulders
2. Strongylocentrotus spp.
(sea urchins)
3. Pterygophora californica (UK)
4. Macrocystis ‘integrifolia’ (SCK)
5. Parastichopus californicus
(sea cucumber)

6. Haliotis kamtschatkana (abalone)
7. Alaria marginata (UK)
8. Ulva sp. (BC)
Foliose red algae (BC)
9. Saccharina groenlandica (UK)
10. Costaria costata (UK)
11. Salmon

figure 5.2 continued

very near or beyond the southern limit of several key grazers and predators that have
been implicated in having large effects on community structure in southern California. These include red and purple sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus franciscanus and S.
purpuratus; Rogers-Bennett 2013) and one of their predators, the labrid fish Semicossyphus pulcher (California sheephead; Eschmeyer et al. 1983). These forests are also at the
southern limit of the historical range of sea otters (Enhydra lutris; Kenyon 1969). Eisenia
arborea is the dominant understory kelp (figure 5.2A), and geniculate corallines (Amphiroa spp. and Bossiella orbigniana) and predominantly tropical / subtropical fleshy brown
algae (e.g., Dictyota spp., Padina spp.) are very abundant on the bottom (HernándezCarmona et al. 2001, 2011). The forests support fisheries for the abalone Haliotis fulgens
and H. corruguta, and the spiny lobster Panulirus interruptus (Ponce-Díaz et al. 2003).
The grazing mollusc Megastraea undosa and the spotted sand bass or cabrilla, Paralabrax maculatofaciatus, are abundant (G. Hernández-Carmona, pers. comm.). A forest
near the southern limit at Islas San Benito can be seen in a poetic short film (“Mov. IB,”
by Alfredo Barroso; www.youtube.com/user/azuloceano).
The Point Loma kelp forest located off San Diego, California (32.69° N, 117.26° W) is
one of the largest in the world, historically covering around 15 km2 but now a maximum
of around 6 km2 (Foster and Schiel 2010). It is also one of the best-studied kelp forests,
beginning with surveys by Turner et al. (1968) and continuing with numerous studies by

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

1 07

Dayton, Tegner and colleagues (e.g., Dayton et al. 1999). There is considerable variation
within the forest both spatially and temporally, but general patterns are summarized
along an idealized transect (figure 5.2B). The forest occurs on a broad, gently sloping
mudstone–sandstone terrace with pockets of sand, cobbles, and boulders. Giant kelp is
most abundant between depths of 6 and 25 m. The feather boa kelp Egregia menziesii and
the fucoid Stephanocystis (=Cystoseira) osmundacea, which also form surface canopies, and
surf grass (Phyllospadix torreyi) are abundant inshore of giant kelp. The kelps Pelagophycus porra and Laminaria farlowii, and the gorgonian Lophogorgia chilensis, are abundant
offshore in deeper water. One of the commonest kelps of the coast of California, Pterygophora californica, forms dense patches beneath giant kelp. Bottom cover is dominated
by geniculate coralline algae and fleshy red algae (Rhodymenia spp.). The sea anemone
Corynactis californica, the solitary coral Balanophyllia elegans, the solitary tunicate Styela
montereyensis, and numerous sponges are common on the benthos. The whelk Kelletia
kelletii, bat stars (Patiria (=Asterina) miniata), and sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus spp. and
Lytechinus pictus (=anamesus)) are common mobile invertebrates. Abundant fishes include
blacksmith (Chromis punctiipinnis), señorita (Oxyjulis californica), California sheephead (S.
pulcher), kelp bass (P. clathratus), and black-eyed gobies (Coryphopterus nicholsii).
The kelp forest off Del Mar, 25 km north of San Diego (not depicted in figure 5.2),
well illustrates local variation in kelp forest community structure. In contrast to Point
Loma, the giant kelp stand at Del Mar occurs on low-relief rock at depths of 14–16 m
surrounded by a sand bottom (Rosenthal et al. 1974). Understory kelps (P. californica and
L. farlowii) and foliose algae (e.g., the brown Desmarestia ligulata and the red Rhodymenia pacifica) are relatively sparse, and most of the bottom is covered by nongeniculate
coralline algae. Rosenthal et al. documented that the water column and benthos harbor
98 species of benthic macroinvertebrates and 38 species of fish. Red and purple sea
urchins were found on rock mounds and boulders but were not observed to graze
actively on the surrounding vegetation. The forest at San Onofre a few kilometers north
of Del Mar further illustrates local community variation as it occurs on boulders and
cobbles surrounded by sand (Larson and DeMartini 1984) and has experienced large
changes in populations associated with El Niños.
Similar to Del Mar, the benthos along the mainland coast at the northern end of this
province near Santa Barbara is characterized by low-relief mudstone reefs interspersed
with extensive sandy areas and occasional rocky outcrops. The area is relatively protected
from large swells by Point Conception to the northwest and the Channel Islands to the
south. The Arroyo Quemado kelp forest (34.47° N, 120.12° W), one of the Santa Barbara
Coastal Long-Term Ecological Research sites (e.g., Reed et al. 2011), is representative of
kelp forests on rocky reefs in the area (figure 5.2C). Descriptions from D. Reed (pers.
comm.) indicate that the benthic organisms are similar to those described at Campus
Point by Neushul et al. (1976), and the fish assemblage is similar to that at nearby sites
such as Naples Reef described by Ebeling et al. (1980). Macrocystis occurs between 5 and
15 m depth. Extensive patches of sand occur above 5 m, interspersed with patches of the

108

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

kelp E. menziesii, surf grass (P. torreyi), and geniculate coralline algae. The understory
kelp P. californica and the fleshy red algae Chondracanthus corymbiferus and R. californica
are common beneath giant kelp, as are sponges, tunicates, bryozoans, and the large
tube-dwelling polychaete Diopatra ornata. Red and purple sea urchins, bat stars, the
large sea star Pisaster giganteus, lobsters, and various molluscs are common. Kelp bass,
various surfperches, rockfish, and California sheephead are the most abundant fishes.
The forest terminates in a sand bottom at the seaward edge.
In contrast to the mainland, waters around offshore islands in this province are generally clearer and there is a greater amount of high-relief rock, conditions favorable to the
growth of giant kelp and other rocky subtidal organisms. The majority of information on
island kelp forests comes from the Channel Islands off southern California. Santa Catalina Island, near the southern end of this island group (33.41° N, 118.45° W), is bathed
in warm southern waters. The kelp forests on the leeward side of the island experience
little upwelling (Zimmerman and Kremer 1984) and are inhabited by many species with
southern, warm-water affinities (Neushul et al. 1967). Somewhat oddly, the kelp forests
are bounded at their shallow end by the stipitate kelp E. arborea, and at their deep end
by this same species and two other understory kelps, L. farlowii and Agarum fimbriatum,
which can form dense beds ranging to >30 m depth (Foster and Schiel 1993). These
understory kelps are rare beneath the dense giant kelp canopy, where the understory is
dominated by foliose brown and red algae, and coralline algae (Foster and Schiel 1993).
Giant kelp forests in the northern Channel Islands are more diverse than those of
the mainland and if suitable substrata are available, giant kelp extends into deeper water
(e.g., 35 m at Anacapa Island; Neushul et al. 1967). Ebeling et al. (1980) suggested that
the continuity of well-developed rocky reefs, clearer water, and the high density of macroalgae and invertebrates (important sources of fish food) covering the bottom on the
islands contribute to the increased density, biomass, and diversity of fishes that occupy
these offshore forests. The physical presence of the Islands and the confluence of cold
northern and warm southern currents produce complex circulation patterns that result
in considerable spatial variation in temperature that correlates with floral and faunal
differences among sites arrayed along the Channel Islands (Neushul et al. 1967, Murray
et al. 1980, Hamilton et al. 2010).

CO L D T EMPER AT E N O R T HE A S T PACIFI C

•

Central California

to Southeast Alaska

This large marine province extends from Point Conception, the boundary between
southern and central California, through the Aleutian Islands in Alaska. Macrocystis in
two ecomorphs (Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ and M. ‘integrifolia’) occurs along the ca. 4000 km
of the coastline from Point Conception to Kodiak Island, Alaska (57.5° N, 153.3° W).
Provincial boundaries are associated with the Alaska and California Currents, which
are branches of the Subarctic Boundary Current. The Alaska Current moves relatively

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

109

cold water (although warm for Alaska) northeast, while California Current moves water
south before becoming a largely offshore current at Point Conception (figure 1.5), producing a relatively abrupt change in temperature and circulation that defines the southern provincial boundary. Many species that are common south of Point Conception
are rare to the north, including California sheephead and spiny lobster, whereas others
such as rockfishes (Sebastes spp.) are more common and diverse to the north. There is
a translocated population of sea otters (Enhydra lutris) at San Nicholas Island, but otters
are otherwise rare south of Point Conception, at least currently. They do occur and are
often abundant along central California and portions of British Columbia and Alaska
(Riedman and Estes 1988). Depressed nutrient levels, low enough to affect giant kelp
growth and survival, are common south of Point Conception and in combination with
large waves during El Niños cause widespread mortality (review and data in Edwards
and Estes 2006). In contrast, low nutrients are rare north of Point Conception but waves
are larger, causing large seasonal and year-to-year changes in subtidal M. ‘pyrifera’ abundance between Point Conception and Año Nuevo Island (37.11° N, 122.34° W; Foster
1982, Foster and Schiel 1985, Reed et al. 2011).
This difference in wave action is likely to be the major cause of the shift from M. ‘pyrifera’ to the bull kelp Nereocystis luetkeana (figure 1.1) at exposed sites within the range of M.
‘pyrifera’ (Foster 1982, Harrold et al. 1988, Foster and VanBlaricom 2001). Bull kelp forests become ubiquitous and M. ‘pyrifera’ forests are generally absent as wave disturbance
increases from Año Nuevo Island north to southeast Alaska (Foster and Schiel 1985). Bull
kelp sporophytes are well adapted to mechanical stress (Koehl and Wainwright 1977), are
annual, and are generally absent in winter when more frequent and larger waves occur.
They also appear to be less affected than Macrocystis by sea urchin grazing (Pearse and
Hines 1979, Foster 1982) so the reduction in giant kelp north of Año Nuevo Island may
also be related to increased grazing in the current absence of sea otters.
Stillwater Cove (36.57° N, 121.95° W) has a well-studied kelp forest that is semi-protected from waves in Carmel Bay, central California (figure 5.2D). It and a few others
in the Monterey region were the first to be observed by diving (Andrews 1945). Other
descriptions are provided by Foster (1982), Reed and Foster (1984), and Konar and Foster
(1992), and from data obtained in surveys done since 1977 by the subtidal ecology class at
Moss Landing Marine Laboratories (Pearse et al. 2013). The conglomerate and sandstone
bottom of the cove is a mosaic of plateaus and pinnacles surrounded by relatively flat rock
or fields of small boulders. A stand of M. ‘integrifolia’ occurs from the low intertidal zone
to a depth of 1 m (figure 5.2D). This gives way to Egregia menziesii, Laminaria farlowii,
L. setchellii, Stephanocystis osmundacea, and patches of surf grass to around 7 m depth.
M. ‘pyrifera’ occurs at depths between 2 and 20 m, terminating in a sand bottom at the
mouth of the cove. Dense stands of the kelp Pterygophora californica occur in the understory. Pterygophora grows very large at this site (>1 m tall) and is particularly abundant
on the tops of plateaus where it can produce a nearly closed canopy. Geniculate coralline
algae, Calliarthron spp., form dense mats of entangled branches up to 10 cm tall on

11 0

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

the bottom surrounding the Pterygophora canopy and adjacent areas, and over extensive
areas of nongeniculate (encrusting) corallines. Cryptopleura farlowiana and other fleshy
red algae can be abundant in spring, often as epiphytes on Calliarthron. Bryozoans,
sponges, solitary corals, and sea anemones are common on steeply sloping vertical walls.
A diverse suite of mobile animals occurs throughout Stillwater Cove. Turban snails
(Tegula spp.) are extremely abundant, grazing on the benthos and on giant kelp plants
throughout the water column and at the sea surface, as they do at other sites around
Monterey Bay (Watanabe 1984a, 1984b). High densities of small purple sea urchins are
found in the coralline mats (Kenner 1992). Large sea urchins and abalone are rare, probably because this site lacks suitable crack and crevice refuges from sea otter predation. Sea
star diversity is high but only the bat star is abundant. Fish are abundant, especially juvenile rockfish, adult blue and kelp rockfishes, various surfperches, and greenlings (Hexagrammos spp.). Gobies and sculpins are common on the bottom. Brandt’s cormorants
(Phalacrocorax pennicillatus) dive for fishes in the forest, western (Larus occidentalis) and
other gulls rest and forage at the surface, and great blue herons (Ardea herodias) and snowy
egrets (Egretta thula) walk on the thick kelp canopies hunting for small fish. Harbor seals
(Phoca vitulina) forage for fish within the forest (review in Foster and Schiel 1985).
This site also illustrates well how variation in topography and water clarity at the
scale of hundreds of meters can affect forest distribution. The mouth of the cove terminates in sand at around 25 m depth, but the western edge is a rocky point (Cypress
Point ) that slopes into the clearer waters of Carmel Bay to depths of over 30 m. This
deeper area and similar areas to the south along the Big Sur coast were described by
Spalding et al. (2003) from scuba and remotely operated vehicle (ROV) surveys. Giant
kelp occurs to around 30 m, bordered at its deeper edge by the large, annual brown alga
Desmarestia ligulata, and beds of the kelps Eisenia arborea and Pleurophycus gardneri, the
latter to a depth of 45 m. Many of the same species of red algae seen beneath giant kelp
in shallower water also occur in this deep region.
The kelp forest at Sand Hill Bluff, near Santa Cruz (36.96° N, 122.13° W), is one of the
most northerly M. ‘pyrifera’ forests in the province and, similar to other forests in this
wave-exposed region (e.g., Point Santa Cruz), has a low-relief mudstone substratum interspersed with patches of sand (Yellin et al. 1977, Pearse and Hines 1979, Breda and Foster
1985). The substratum is similar to that of the Arroyo Quemado kelp forest in southern
California described above, and also terminates in a sandy bottom at around 16 m depth.
The contrast between forests at Sand Hill Bluff and Stillwater Cove further illustrates the
local variation that occurs among kelp forests within a region. Sand Hill Bluff is in the
lee of a small point, slightly protected from northwest swells (Cowen et al. 1982, Foster
1982). At the time of sampling, the bottom at shallower depths (above 6 m) was dominated not by the geniculate corallines found at Stillwater Cove but by an assemblage of
fleshy, thin-bladed red algae, especially C. farlowiana, Polyneura latissima, and Phycodrys
setchellii, growing among dense mats of bryozoans, sponges, and tunicates. Giant kelp
occurred between 6 and 14 m depths, with widely dispersed patches of the understory

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

111

kelps L. setchellii and P. californica. Red algae also occurred under the giant kelp canopy but
their abundance was reduced, presumably by light limitation. The brown alga D. ligulata
was very abundant, particularly in spring and early summer after winter storms removed
much of the giant kelp canopy. Sponges, tunicates, and pholad clams were common sessile
animals. Over 50% of the bottom was unoccupied rock. Red sea urchins were common,
clumped in small crevices and depressions. Turban snails were rare. The sea stars Patiria
miniata, Pycnopodia helianthoides, and Pisaster spp. were common. Red algal abundance
increased on rock in deeper water outside the canopy, as did that of sea urchins, tunicates,
the anemone Corynactis californica, and the tube-dwelling polychaete Diopatra ornata.
Sand Hill Bluff was sampled qualitatively (Yellin et al. 1977) and quantitatively
(Cowen et al. 1982, Foster 1982) in the late 1970s prior to sea otter (E. lutris) range
expansion into the area, and qualitatively observed in 1983 and 1985 after otters arrived.
These post-otter surveys (M. Foster, pers. obs.) noted a decline in red sea urchins that
could have resulted from sea otter foraging, disease (Pearse et al. 1977), large swells
associated with the 1982–1983 El Niño, or some combination of these and other factors.
The structure of the forest, however, remained similar to that seen in previous surveys.
Sea urchins at nearby Point Santa Cruz had larger effects, however, as documented
by Pearse and Hines (1979). Prior to 1976, this forest ended at a depth of 6 m where
it was replaced by high densities of sea urchins. The forest expanded to the rock–sand
interface at 9 m depth following sea urchin mortality from disease, and sea urchins
were further reduced throughout the forest when sea otters arrived at the site in 1977.
The large differences between Stillwater Cove and Sand Hill Bluff described above
are most likely the result primarily of differences in substratum type and exposure (Foster 1982). Other forests similar to Stillwater Cove with hard rocky substrata and little
sand influence have also been described in the region. Harrold et al. (1988), for example,
described four sites along a wave exposure gradient and found that as exposure increased,
bull kelp, understory kelps, and geniculate corallines increased. They argued this was
probably the result of an indirect effect of an increase in light due to more thinning and
greater seasonal loss of the giant kelp canopy. Foster and VanBlaricom (2001) sampled
nine sites along the wave-exposed Big Sur coast, including a site near the one previously
described by McLean (1962). They found that six of these sites were similar in composition to Stillwater Cove and to the exposed sites of Harrold et al. (1988). At three sites,
however, sessile invertebrates rather than algae covered around 40% of the bottom. These
sites were in areas with very high relief and often steeply sloping bottoms, a topography
that at small scales within kelp forests is also dominated by sessile invertebrates. Based
on similarities and differences among all subtidal kelp forests described from the Big Sur
region to Año Nuevo Island, Foster and VanBlaricom (2001) suggested that they could be
grouped into four general “kelp forest types” associated with differences in substratum
and wave exposure: (1) wave-exposed forests on low-relief, soft mudstone characterized by
high seasonal disturbance and low light with variable abundances of giant and bull kelp
and an understory dominated by rapidly growing, thin-bladed foliose red algae; (2) wave-

112

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

protected forests with a hard, moderate relief substratum, moderate-light conditions,
persistent giant kelp canopies, and an understory of thick-bladed, relatively slow-growing
foliose red algae; (3) wave-exposed forests on hard, moderate to high relief substratum
with a seasonal reduction of kelp canopies and an understory dominated by coralline
algae and various kelps; and (4) wave-exposed forests with hard, steeply sloping substrata
dominated by seasonally variable kelp canopies and an understory of sessile invertebrates.
Occasional stands of M. ‘integrifolia’ also occur along the open coast in this region,
forming “mini-forests” in shallow water. In central California, Oregon, and Washington, these are usually found from the low intertidal zone to a few meters’ depth in
the extreme lee of points, as at Stillwater Cove. They can also occupy tide pools. For
example, “The Great Tide” pool at the southern end of Monterey Bay, featured in John
Steinbeck’s novel “Cannery Row,” is a mini-kelp forest that people can wade through at
low tide. It contains a high diversity of invertebrates typically found in large tide pools
in the area (M. Foster, pers. obs.). These types of shallow “forests” have not been quantitatively sampled, but our observations at low tide indicate they contain few organisms
other than giant kelp. The bottom cover is usually dominated by the thickly intertwined,
strap-like holdfasts of M. ‘integrifolia,’ and the very dense canopy not only reduces light
but also brushes over and then lies on the bottom as the tide recedes.
These very shallow stands contrast with many of those in semi-protected bays and
tidal channels of Washington, British Columbia, and Alaska where M. ‘integrifolia’
occurs from the intertidal zone to depths of at least 12 m. Studies of these forests have
generally focused either on harvesting giant kelp or on the effects of sea urchins and
sea otters on the distribution of large brown algae, with few data on other associated
organisms. Druehl (1978) found in British Columbia that giant kelp occurred at sites
characterized by hard substrata, high salinity, and moderate water motion (waves or
tidal currents). Druehl and Breen (1986) provided some information on associated algae
and invertebrates at a site in Barkley Sound on the west coast of Vancouver Island, British Columbia. Giant kelp occurs from the low intertidal zone to 4 m depth where the
substratum changes from rock to boulders and sand (figure 5.2E). The understory is
inhabited by some species found in central California and others found only further
north. Understory kelps include P. californica, Costaria costata, Saccharina (=Laminaria)
groenlandica (a far northern species), and Alaria marginata, with the brown alga D.
ligulata, the green Ulva spp., and various red algae on the bottom. Abundant large invertebrates include red (Strongylocentrotus franciscanus) and green (S. droebachiensis (a far
northern species) sea urchins, the abalone Haliotis kamtschatkana (another far northern
species), and the sea cucumber Parastichopus californicus. This forest was similar to
those described by Shaffer (2000) in the Strait of Juan de Fuca in Washington. Shaffer
(2000) noted that these forests can be important habitats for resident rockfish and also
for migrating salmon, which feed on various small fishes along the forest edge.
High densities of sea urchins occur along the lower edge of some of these forests and
can have a large, persistent influence on the lower limits of giant kelp (Druehl 1978),

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

113

especially along the west coast of Vancouver Island, similar to conditions off Santa Cruz
Island, California, before disease severely reduced sea urchin populations (Mattison
et al. 1977). When the sea urchins were removed either experimentally (Pace 1981) or
by sea otters (Watson and Estes 2011), the forest expanded to the limit of hard substrata
(usually less than 10–12 m). After sea urchin removal, the expansion often begins with
annual brown algae, followed by Macrocystis and perennial understory kelps. Annuals
may increase again, depending on temporal variation in the abundance of perennial
species at particular sites (Watson and Estes 2011). Based on historical distributional
records, van Tamelen and Woodby (2001) suggested that at least some N. luetkeana
forests in southeast Alaska became Macrocystis forests after sea otters reduced the abundance of sea urchins, as occurred on the Big Sur coast of California after the return of
sea otters (McLean 1962).

WA R M T EM P ER AT E S O U T H E A S T ER N PAC IFI C • Northern Peru

to the West Coast of Southern Chile

This very large coastal province extends from remarkably near the equator in the Gulf
of Guayaquil at the Peru–Ecuador border (4.44° S, 81.33° W) to Chiloé Island, Chile
(42.50° S, 74.19° W; Briggs 1974, Spalding et al. 2007; figure 1.5). The documented
northern limit of Macrocystis is in the region of Piura—Islas Lobos de Tierra, Peru, at
6° S latitude, around 200 km south of the Gulf of Guayaquil (Neushul 1971a, Hoffmann
and Santelices 1997). Giant kelp continues southward of this region along the west
coast of South America across the southern provincial limit to the tip of the continent,
a distance of around 6000 km, well exceeding the total distributional length of the
species in the northeastern Pacific. The province is swept by the Peru–Chile (Humboldt) Current that originates from the cold, eastward-flowing Antarctic Circumpolar
Current (West Wind Drift) where it intersects South America near Chiloé Island. The
Peru–Chile Current gradually warms as it flows north, and veers away from the coast
near the Gulf of Guayaquil. This and associated nearshore currents produce complex
circulation patterns along the coast (reviews in Santelices 1991, Thiel et al. 2007) that
affect upwelling. Cool, upwelled waters from Concepcíón north into Peru moderate the
general warming trend and facilitate the presence of giant and other kelp populations
(review in Vásquez et al. 2006). El Niño conditions alter the currents and can depress
upwelling, with large negative effects on Macrocystis and changes in associated species.
These oceanographic features and their effects on giant kelp forests are like those along
the coast of the southern part of the northeastern Pacific, particularly Baja California.
The ‘integrifolia’ and ‘pyrifera’ ecomorphs of Macrocystis occur in the province, with
Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ dominant in the south northward to Valparaíso, and M. ‘integrifolia’
dominant from Valparaíso north to the provincial boundary. The two ecomorphs overlap around Valparaíso and again at the northern end of the province in Peru (Neushul
1971a, Vásquez 2008). The exposed shallow subtidal zone north of Valparaíso (north

114

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

A. South Central Chile

7.

0m

6.
5m
5.
10 m
4.
15 m
3.
2.

1.

1. Lessonia trabeculata (UK)
2. Tetrapygus niger (sea urchin)
3. Dictyota kunthii (BC)
Asparagopsis armata (BC)
4. Concholepas concholepas
(Chilean abalone)
B. Beagle Channel

5. Pyura chilensis (tunicate)
6. Lessonia nigrescens
(shallow water kelp)
7. Lontra felina (sea cat)

7.

8.

0m

3m

6.

3.

4.

6m

5.

9m

2.
1.
1. Boulders
2. Epymenia falklandica (BC)
Gigartina skottsbergii (BC)
3. Lessonia flavicans (UK)
4. Loxechinus albus
+ 3 other species (sea urchins)

5. Cosmasterias lurida (sea star)
6. Gastropods Tegula sp.
Nacella mytilina Fissurella spp.
7. Larus dominicus (gull)
8. Lontra felina (sea cat)

figure 5.3
Distribution of conspicuous plants and animals found in five giant kelp forests (A–E) within the
range of Macrocystis in the southern hemisphere.
BC = bottom canopy; SCF = surface canopy fucoid; SCK = surface canopy kelp; UF = understory fucoid;
UK = understory kelp.
notes: The symbols in Figure 5.2 Panel A for sand (1), sessile animals (3), and Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ (4) are
generic to all fi gures unless otherwise noted. Organisms and horizontal axes are not to scale. Depth distribution is indicated on the right.

C. Tasmania

0m

9.

8.

5m

7.

10.
3.

4.

5. 6.

10 m

2.
15 m
1.
6. Cystophora spp. (UF)
7. Cenolia trichoptera (crinoid)
8. Bottom canopy
Fleshy red algae
Nongeniculate corallines
9. Phyllospora comosa (SCF)
10. Meuschenia freycineti (leather jacket)

1. Sea urchins
Centrostephanus rodgersii
Heliocidaris erythrogramma
2. Ecklonia radiata (UK)
3. Acrocarpia paniculata (UF)
4. Haliotis rubra (abalone)
5. Jasus edwardsii (lobster)
D. New Zealand

0m
10.
9.

3m

8.
6. 7.
4.

6m

5.

3.

9m

2.
1.
1. Perna canaliculus (mussel)
7. Haliotis iris (abalone)
2. Pyura pachydermatina (tunicate)
8. Evechinus chloroticus (sea urchin)
3. Ecklonia radiata (UK)
9. Other gastropods
4. Geniculate corallines (BC)
Trochus viridis
5. Landsburgia quercifolia (SCF, UF)
Cookia sulcata
6. Carpophyllum
10. Odax pullus (butterfish)
maschalocarpum (SCF, UF)
figure 5.3 continued

12 m

E. Marion Island

0m

9.

7.
6.

4.

8.
5m

10 m

5.

15 m
2.

3.

1.
1. Pseudocnus laevigatus
(sea cucumber)
2. Pseudoechinus marionis
(sea urchin)
3. Macrocystis ‘laevis’ (SCK)
4. Bottom canopy
Schizoseris sp.
Halopteris sp.

20 m
5. Anasterias rupicola
+ others (sea stars)
6. Desmarestia rossii (BC)
7. Durvillaea sp. (UF)
8. Durvillaea antarctica
(shallow water fucoid)
9. Notothenia coriiceps
(black rockcod)

figure 5.3 continued

central and northern Chile) is dominated by the kelp Lessonia trabeculata, the abundance of which (as biomass) is over 1000 times greater than that of M. ‘integrifolia’
(Vásquez 2008). Giant kelp is restricted to wave-protected sites and occurs from the
intertidal zone to depths of around 15 m (Villouta and Santelices 1984, Santelices 1991,
Vásquez and Buschmann 1997). A “typical” M. ‘pyrifera’ forest in south-central Chile
is diagrammed (figure 5.3A), based on descriptions by Santelices (1991), Pérez-Matus
et al. (2007), Vásquez et al. (2006), and Villegas et al. (2007). The large stipitate kelps
L. nigrescens and L. trabeculata commonly co-occur with giant kelp, with L. nigrescens
forming a band above the upper limit of the kelp forest. L. trabeculata occurs in the
understory beneath giant kelp and can be abundant in deeper water outside the kelp forest. Cavities in the cortex of the blades of this species cause the thalli to float, and plants
reach up to 2.5 m tall, appearing tree-like (Hoffmann and Santelices 1997). Bryozoans,
the tunicate Pyura chilensis, the brown alga Glossophora kunthii, and frondose red algae
(e.g., Asparagopsis armata) can be abundant beneath the kelps, as can a bottom cover of
nongeniculate coralline algae, which are especially abundant in areas dominated by the
black sea urchin Tetrapygus niger. The herbivorous gastropod Tegula tridentata can be
abundant. Invertebrate carnivores include various sea stars and the large muricid gastropod Concholepas concholepas (Chilean “abalone” or loco). Many of the common fishes

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

117

are from tropically derived families, including the herbivore Aplodactylus punctatus, and
the benthic-feeding carnivores Semicossyphus maculatus (Chilean sheephead), Cheilodactylus variegatus and Girella laevifrons. The southern sea lion Otaria flavescens (Alonso
et al. 2000) and the sea cat Lontra (=Lutra) felina (Larivière 1998) are found throughout
the province and southward, and forage in a variety of habitats including kelp forests.
Unlike its northern relative Enhydra lutris, L. felina rarely eats sea urchins. There are no
comprehensive descriptions of Macrocystis forests in Peru, but observations by Fernández et al. (1999) suggest their composition is similar to that of northern Chile.
M. ‘pyrifera’ populations at the southern end of the province are perennial in waveexposed locations but annual in protected waters where they are affected by high temperatures and low nutrients in spring and summer (Buschmann et al. 2006). More
species with southern, cold-water affinities are associated with giant kelp in this region
(e.g., the sea urchins Loxechinus albus and Arbacia dufresnei, and the red alga Sarcothalia
crispata). Grazing by the turban snail T. atra can negatively affect recruitment of young
sporophytes in the annual giant kelp populations, but it appears to have little effect on
the overall abundance of adult giant kelp or other seaweeds (Moreno and Sutherland
1982, Henríquez et al. 2011). The annual community is unusual not only because it
is annual but also because it lacks understory kelps; the bottom is dominated by the
slipper limpet Crepipatella fecunda that can facilitate giant kelp recruitment (Henríquez
et al. 2011).

M AGEL L A NI C P R OV IN C E • West Coast of Southern Chile–

Southeast Argentina

The intersection of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current with southern South America
produces the Cape Horn Current that flows south along the coast from around Chiloé
Island, among and through numerous islands and channels, and around Cape Horn.
Cold water on the east side of Cape Horn flows north along the coast of Argentina
as the Falkland Current, turning east and leaving the coast in the vicinity of Rio de
Plata (at 35° S). These coastal currents bound the province (figure 1.5), which includes
the Islas Diego Ramírez (56.49° S, 68.72° W). Giant kelp occurs around these islands
(Contreras et al. 1983) and may represent the southernmost populations in the Southern Hemisphere. Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ is the only ecomorph, and it occurs throughout
the province, including the Falkland Islands. Neushul (1971a) did not observe plants
north of Rio Colorado (40° S) although drift plants have been observed to Rio de Plata
(Kühnemann 1970).
The structure and diversity of kelp forests in this province greatly impressed Darwin
(1839). Dayton (1985b) described numerous forests from Isla de Los Estados off the tip
of Cape Horn to Chiloé Island. Some of the best-studied forests are around Puerto Toro
(55.08° S, 67.06° W) in Beagle Channel (e.g., Moreno and Jara 1984, Santelices and
Ojeda 1984a, Vásquez et al. 1984, Castilla 1985; figure 5.3B). The general vegetation

118

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

structure is similar to northern Chile, but there is a difference in species. Macrocystis
occurs in forests covering several square kilometers at Islas Los Estados, but in Beagle
Channel they occur in 50–100 m wide coastal belts to 15 m depth where rock meets
soft substratum. The upper limit is bounded by dense stands of the kelp Lessonia flavicans (=L. vadosa; Guiry and Guiry 2012). This species occurs less abundantly under
giant kelp and can form dense stands in deeper water outside the giant kelp canopy,
a bimodal distribution similar to that of the kelp Eisenia arborea at Catalina Island in
southern California described previously. Fleshy red algae such as Epymenia falklandica
and Gigartina skottsbergii and patches of algal turf, all underlain by crustose algae, cover
the bottom (Santelices 1991). Loxechinus albus is the most abundant (based on biomass)
of the four sea urchin species in the region, and Cosmasterias lurida is the most common
sea star. This sea star is a benthic predator that rarely eats sea urchins (Castilla 1985).
The urchins that feed primarily on drift algae can occur in dense patches and locally
reduce macroalgal abundance (Dayton 1985b, Newcombe et al. 2012), but appear to have
no large-scale effects (Castilla 1985, review in Vásquez and Buschmann 1997).
Darwin (1839) marveled at the diverse invertebrates associated with giant kelp in the
region. Quantitative studies have identified from 43 to 114 taxa associated with giant kelp
holdfasts (Ojeda and Santelices 1984, Rios et al. 2007), and 63 taxa from holdfasts and
fronds combined (Adami and Gordillo 1999). Although difficult to compare with other
studies due to differences in sampling design, the sizes of organisms collected, and
taxonomic resolution, this richness is certainly lower than that reported for holdfasts
(>150 species) or fronds alone (114 species) in southern California (Ghelardi 1971, Coyer
1984). Species richness of algae, fishes, and most other major groups associated with
giant kelp is also reduced relative to southern California, perhaps reflecting geographic
isolation (Santelices 1991) and extinctions related to Pleistocene glaciation (review in
Camus 2001). The fish fauna is composed mainly of the southern cold-water Antarctic
cods (nototheniids) Notothenia magellanica and Patagonotothen spp., which are demersal
fishes that feed on amphipods, polychaetes, and other benthic invertebrates associated
with decomposing drift algae. Herbivorous fishes are absent from these descriptions.
Moreno and Jara (1984) noted that the habitat and niche characteristics of the 18 fish
species that occur in the region are similar to those in the Aleutian Islands, Alaska, even
though their taxonomic composition is quite different. Various birds and mammals
forage in and around the forests. The gull Larus dominicus is noteworthy because its
foraging on the very abundant bivalve Gaimardia trapesina living on giant kelp fronds
may represent the largest removal of energy by any high-level predator in the community (Hockey 1988). Predation may also prevent the fronds from sinking, as happened
in southern California when another small bivalve, the scallop Leptopecten latiauratus,
settled by the thousands on giant kelp fronds (McPeak et al. 1988).
Giant kelp forests along the southern coast of Argentina occur in gradually warming
waters from south to north. Kühnemann (1970) described extensive stands at Puerto
Deseado (47.7° S) in the intertidal zone and also subtidally, where there is understory

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

119

kelp (Lessonia sp.) and a diverse assemblage of fleshy and coralline red algae. Sea urchins
are rare. Seven forests were described along the coast of Chubut between 46° S and
42° S by Barrales and Lobban (1975). Forests occurred from the low intertidal zone to
15 m depth, with their lower depth limit defined by available sandstone substratum and
their composition associated with variation in wave exposure. The understory in wavesheltered forests is dominated by the green alga Codium vermilara, in moderately exposed
forests by Lessonia sp. (also forming a band at the upper margin of the forests), various
other brown (e.g., Zonaria sp.) and red (e.g., Callophyllis sp., Corallina offi cinalis) algae,
and in the one exposed forest by foliose red algae Hymenena falklandica and Epymenia
sp., and “plates” of nongeniculate corallines. The mussel Aulacomya ater, brittle stars
Ophioplocus (=Ophioceramis) sp., and turban snails occurred in protected microhabitats
in all exposures. Sea urchins were present but were neither large nor abundant, and
only six species of fish were noted as common. The sea lion Otaria byronia was also seen
within forests. The most important grazer appeared to be the isopod Phycolimnoria sp.
that bores into and weakens holdfasts, contributing to the observed loss of plants in a
3–4 year cycle. At the time of their surveys, Barrales and Lobban (1975) noted that this
section of the South American coast was largely uninhabited by humans, with little
coastal development and few fisheries, making it an ideal area for studying giant kelp
forests little disturbed by human activities. We are, however, unaware of any studies in
the region since 1975.

OT HER T EMP ER AT E S O U T HER N HEMISP HER E P R OV IN C E S

Macrocystis occurs in five other temperate provinces in the southern hemisphere: the
isolated island groups Tristan da Cunha–Gough Islands groups (37.24° S, 12.44° W),
Amsterdam–Saint Paul Islands (38.36° S, 77.58° W), the Agulhas at the southern end of
South Africa, the southeast Australian shelf, and southern New Zealand (Setchell 1932,
Womersley 1954; recent distributional records in Hay 1990, Perissinotto and McQuaid
1992). There are no descriptions of giant kelp communities for the island provinces or
Agulhas. Macrocystis ‘angustifolia’ is the only ecomorph present in the Agulhas region,
and it occurs only in an upwelling area (Bolton and Levitt 1987; figure 1.5) at protected
sites inshore from forests of the dominant canopy-forming kelp in the province, Ecklonia
maxima (Isaac 1937b in Womersley 1954). Upwelling occurs up the west coast of southern Africa into Namibia (part of the Benguela Province in Spalding et al. 2007) but,
while temperatures appear suitable (Bolton and Levitt 1987), giant kelp is absent. Womersley (1954) suggested this is because currents do not favor the transport of drift plants,
and faunal differences discussed by Briggs (1974) also suggest a lack of larval transport.
Increased turbidity may also be a factor (R. J. Anderson, pers. comm.) as well as a very
linear and wave-exposed coastline with little rocky habitat (Field and Griffiths 1991).
The southeast Australia province includes the cooler waters of Tasmania, Bass Strait,
and the southeastern Australian mainland from near Robe, South Australia, to the east

12 0

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

and north around the tip of the continent to Bermagui, New South Wales (Briggs 1974).
Giant kelp occurs in the southern region of the province from its western end eastward
to Walkerville, Victoria, along the mainland, inshore from fringing reefs at depths of
2–10 m and offshore at depths to 35 m (Womersley 1954, Shepherd and Sanderson
2013), and along western Tasmania shores and reefs in Bass Strait. Although M. ‘angustifolia’ is the most abundant ecomorph in the province, M. ‘pyrifera’ is also present and
the only ecomorph in Tasmania. Cribb (1954) provided the first descriptions of these
forests, noting that giant kelp was sparse along the mainland, but stands on the east
and south coasts of Tasmania occurred as extensive fringes along protected shores as
well as offshore. The large fucoid Phyllospora comosa and nongeniculate coralline algae
usually formed a dense band in shallow water of the fringing forests in Tasmania and
Bass Strait, and the deeper ends of forests were often determined by the presence of a
sandy bottom (figure 5.3C). Surveys and experiments by Barrett et al. (2009) and Ling
et al. (2010) described species associated with giant kelp in several Tasmanian forests.
The stipitate kelp of Australia and New Zealand, E. radiata, a diverse assemblage of large
fucoids (e.g., Cystophora spp., Sargassum spp., Acrocarpia paniculata), and various fleshy
and encrusting red algae commonly occur beneath giant kelp, particularly at depths
shallower than around 10 m. The invasive Japanese kelp Undaria pinnatifida now also
occurs seasonally at some sites (Valentine and Johnson 2003). Invertebrates include
bryozoans, sponges and sea stars, the crinoid Cenolia trichoptera, the sea urchins Centrostephanus rodgersii and Heliocidaris erythrogramma, and commercially fished lobster
(Jasus edwardsii) and abalone (Haliotis rubra). Large fishes include several wrasses and
the leather jacket Meuschenia freycineti. The weedy sea dragon Phyllopteryx taeniolatus occurs among algal fronds. Australian giant kelp forests have experienced severe
declines over the last 30 years associated with El Niños, exceptionally large storms, and
the increasing influence of the warm, nutrient-poor, southward flowing East Australian
Current (figure 1.5). Data from a site in southern Tasmania indicate that the inverse relationship between temperature and nitrate found in California (Chapter 3) also obtains
in Tasmania, with similar effects on giant kelp growth (Shepherd and Sanderson 2013).
In addition, increasing temperatures and the shoreward movement of the warm water
current have facilitated larval transport from northern waters of the diadematid sea
urchin C. rodgersii to Tasmania, where it has deforested large areas (Johnson et al. 2011,
Wernberg et al. 2011). These declines in Australian giant kelp forests led to their listing
as an endangered ecological community in 2012 under the Australian Environmental
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act (Shepherd and Sanderson 2013).
The Southern New Zealand Province includes the southernmost part of North
Island from around 37° S, the South Island, Stewart Island, the Snares Islands, and
the Chatham Islands 700 km to the east (Spalding et al. 2007; considered as a Region
by Briggs 1974). M. ‘pyrifera’ is the only ecomorph in the province. It occurs north to
Castle Point (40° S, 176.23° E) on the southeast coast of the North Island, but only to
Jackson Head (43.98° S, 168.59° E) on the west coast of the South Island. The southern

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

121

figure 5.4
Giant kelp forest (top) and dense aggregation of the abalone H. iris (bottom), at the
Chatham Islands, New Zealand. Note the
lack of understory algae in the forest. Abalone are abundant in shallow water (2–4 m)
where they feed on macroalgal drift.
source: Photos by M. S. Foster.

distribution is probably related to the influence of the Southland Current that brings
cooler water from the region of Jackson Head along southern New Zealand and northward along the east coast (figure 1.5). Smaller-scale distribution is correlated with local
variation in temperature and the availability of rock at suitable depths (Hay 1990). On
the mainland, giant kelp occurs on the open coast in patches with suitable substrata,
at the mouths of fiords, and within bays. It occurs in protected areas at the Chatham
Islands (Hay 1990, Schiel et al. 1995). As in southeast Australia, one of the most distinguishing features of these forests is the diverse and abundant flora of large fucoids.
Schiel and Hickford (2001) used depth-stratified sampling to describe the giant kelp
forest at Godley Head on the protected side of Banks Peninsula near Christchurch.
Macrocystis occurs from 3 to 9 m depth, mixed with a sparse understory of the fucoids
Carpophyllum maschalocarpum and Landsburgia quercifolia at 3–6 m, and stands of the
kelp E. radiata at 6–9 m (figure 5.3D). Geniculate corallines are abundant at all depths.
Encrusting sponges and tunicates, and the stalked tunicate Pyura pachydermatina were
abundant from 9 to 12 m, and the mussel Perna canaliculus forms extensive patches

12 2

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

at the deep end of this range where the forest terminates in a sand bottom. Abalone
(H. iris), top shells (Trochus viridis), and the turbinid Cookia sulcata are abundant in
shallow water, along with the ubiquitous echinometrid sea urchin of the New Zealand
coast, Evechinus chloroticus. Common fishes include a suite of wrasses (Notolabrus spp.),
leatherjackets (Meuschenia (=Parika) scaber), and the herbivorous butterfish Odax pullus.
In contrast to this mainland forest, similar surveys of two sites at the Chatham
Islands (Schiel et al. 1995) found Macrocystis from depths of around 12 to >16 m. The
fucoid C. maschalocarpum dominates in shallow water, and the abundant stipitate kelp
of the New Zealand mainland, E. radiata, is absent. Illustrative of the great variation
found among giant kelp forests in New Zealand is the fact that the bottom beneath
giant kelp at the deep end of at least one forest, when surveyed, was a “barrens” without
sea urchins, almost entirely covered by nongeniculate coralline algae and occasional
sponges and tunicates (figure 5.4). Although heavily fished at the Chathams, abalone
are very abundant in shallow water (figure 5.4). Sea urchin abundance was highly variable among sites and these grazers produced only small patches of deforested areas
when their density was high. Wrasses and the very abundant blue cod, Parapercis colias,
were the most common of the nine species of large reef fishes observed.

S O U T HER N O C E A N

The Southern Ocean is a “Realm” as defined by Spalding et al. (2007), composed of four
provinces, three of which are inhabited by giant kelp: the Subantarctic Islands which
include those south of Australia and South Africa, Subantarctic New Zealand, and the
Scotia Sea south of South America. The land in this Realm comprises mostly isolated
islands or island groups, often referred to collectively as the Subantarctic Islands (which
is somewhat confusing, given that this name is also used to designate a Province within
the Realm). The Subantarctic is defined as the region between roughly 46° S and 66° S.
The southern boundary defines the demarcation between the southern temperate zone
and the Antarctic Circle, the northernmost latitude in the southern hemisphere where
the sun does not go below the horizon in a 24-hour period. The Antarctic Circumpolar
Current (also called the West Wind Drift) flows largely unimpeded through the Realm
with average surface water temperatures of 4–9°C (NASA JPL 2013). Gale-force winds
and large swells are the norm. The differences in the marine biota that distinguish
the provinces are largely ascribed to differences in the age of islands, their geographic
isolation, influence of ice ages, and current patterns that affect colonization (e.g., Briggs
1974). Macrocystis was noted on the lee sides and in protected coves and inlets at most
of these islands during the early explorations by Hooker and others (see Chapter 1, History of Research, and references in Perissinotto and McQuaid 1992 for recent records).
However, the species associated with giant kelp have been described in only a few locations and these descriptions vary, depending on the interests of the investigators. This is
not surprising given the problems of access and weather at these remote locations.

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

123

Macrocystis occurs with quite a variety of different species across the Realm, which
suggests further investigation among these provinces could greatly improve our understanding of the variety of community structures associated with giant kelp forests.
The most studied giant kelp forests across these regions are in the Subantarctic Province at Marion Island (figure 5.3E), one of the two Prince Edward Islands located at
46.9° S, 37.75° E (Hay 1986, Attwood et al. 1991, Beckley and Branch 1992, Perissinotto
and McQuaid 1992). The smooth blades of giant kelp in this region were once thought
to characterize a separate species, Macrocystis ‘laevis’ (see Chapter 1, Taxonomy). Even
within the context of highly variable Macrocystis forests, these forests are unusual as they
occur in two habitats. The more typical forests occur nearshore at depths of 10–20 m.
However, very deep forests occur to depths of 68 m in the exceptionally clear water over
rocky areas of the open shelf between Marion and Prince Edward Islands, the deepest
known stands of giant kelp (Perissinotto and McQuaid 1992). The biota associated with
these deep-water populations have not been described. These deep giant kelp stands do
not reach the sea surface and this, plus great depth, probably contributes to their persistence in very high water motion.
The nearshore forests at Marion Island are 50–100 m wide, commonly bordered
in shallow water by the large, kelp-like fucoids Durvillaea antarctica and perhaps D.
willana, another large brown alga, Desmarestia rossii, and abundant nongeniculate coralline algae, all of which are taxa common in shallow water throughout the Subantarctic
Islands. Beckley and Branch (1992) quantitatively described community composition
and biomass at three sites. They found a high biomass of foliose red (e.g., Schizoseris sp.)
and brown (Halopteris sp.) algae, and the green Codium sp. These declined with depth
within the forest, while the biomass of the 200 species of macrobenthic animals found
increased with depth, which they noted correlated with a decrease in water motion. As
in some sites in southern Chile, the small bivalve Gaimardia trapesina was abundant
on blades within the giant kelp canopy. Only one sea urchin, Pseudoechinus marionis,
was seen. It occurred at densities of up to 50 m−2 but, like many of the other animals,
appeared to feed on detritus within and adjacent to the forests, with little evidence of
direct herbivory (Attwood et al. 1991). Only three fish species were found, their low
diversity being attributed to the isolation and relative youth (<300,000 years old) of the
island (Blankly 1982). The nototheniid Notothenia coriiceps was most abundant and,
like the other two species, feeds on a variety of small benthic polychaetes, crustaceans,
and occasionally limpets. The plunder fish Harpagifer georgianus is commonly eaten
by imperial cormorants, Phalocrocorax atriceps. Although there are some interesting
differences such as a lack of barnacles and large bivalves, Beckley and Branch (1992)
concluded that the fauna was generally similar to that of the Kerguelen Islands in the
same province.
Kelp forests at the Auckland Islands (50.55° S, 166.05° E) in the Subantartic New
Zealand Province have been described by Schiel and colleagues (Kingsford et al. 1989,
Schiel 1990). Subtidal plant zonation was similar to other areas in the cold Southern

12 4

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

Ocean with dense stands of the fucoid D. antarctica in shallow water. In contrast to
other areas, however, dense stands of another large fucoid, Xiphophora chondrophylla,
occurred below D. antarctica, reflecting the diverse and abundant flora of large fucoids
characteristic of Australia and New Zealand. Also abundant in the shallows of exposed
outer reefs was the brown alga Halopteris funicularis, which forms dense feathery beds
on sloping reef walls. The endemic kelp Lessonia brevifolia overlapped the lower limit
of X. chondrophylla and the upper limit of giant kelp, which occurred from 6 to 20 m
depth. The only abundant herbivore was the small (around 7 cm) white abalone, Haliotis virginea. Only eight species of large fishes were observed, the most common being
the benthic, carnivorous nototheniids Paranotothenia angustata and P. microcepidota.
The family composition and low diversity of the fish fauna are reminiscent of southern
Chile, but the species had high affinities with the New Zealand mainland.

WITHIN CO MM UNITIE S: HAB ITAT S AND PATCHE S

As in other communities distributed along environmental gradients, there are often
zones characterized by visually obvious species or group of species. Giant kelp forests
are often terminated by sand at their deep margin. However, when they occur on moderately wave-exposed rocky shores that extend from the littoral into deep water, they are
commonly “zoned,” bordered on their deep and shallow ends by other marine plants,
usually other kelps and fucoids (figure 5.1). These patterns can be a direct result of
changes in the physical environment (e.g., changes in substratum type, light penetration, and wave action with depth; Chapter 3) but may also be influenced by biological
interactions (Chapters 7–9). Within a zone, organisms often occur in “patches” (e.g.,
Dayton et al. 1984), and particular species may occur in different parts of the forest as
a result of resource partitioning (e.g., Foster et al. 2013). These smaller-scale, “withinzone” patterns are discussed below. They have long fascinated kelp forest ecologists, in
part because their causes are most amenable to understanding with field experiments.

B O U L D ER S , C R E V I C E S , K EL P H O L D FA S T S

Arguably the most important contributor to local species diversity and abundance within
giant kelp forests is the diversity of habitats within a forest that results from variation in
rock type, topography, and structural complexity of large benthic organisms, relationships
similar to those on coral reefs (review in Alexander et al. 2009). For example, boulder
fields provide considerable structural complexity within the kelp forest at Stillwater Cover
in central California (figure 5.2D). The tops of boulders have a high cover of the geniculate
coralline Bossiella californica subsp. schmittii (Konar and Foster 1992). The undersides and
spaces between boulders accumulate decomposing drift algae, provide some protection
from predators, and are habitat for brittle stars, chitons, juvenile abalone, and clingfish
that are relatively uncommon in other habitats within the forest (M. Foster, pers. obs.).

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

125

Rocks with cracks and crevices are often occupied by abalone and sea urchins, especially
in the presence of predators (e.g., Lowry and Pearse 1973). Sea urchin abundances (Guenther et al. 2012) as well as overall community richness (Torres-Moye et al. 2013) have
been positively correlated with substratum rugosity at sites in southern California and
Baja California Sur, Mexico. Sessile species such as cup corals, bryozoans, tunicates, and
sponges can be aggregated on topographic features (Rosenthal et al. 1974, Foster et al.
2013). These sorts of associations have also been described in Tasmania, where Alexander
et al. (2009) found that rock type (e.g., boulders vs. bedrock) and refuge diversity (e.g.,
crevices, holes) have significant effects on the species richness of mobile invertebrates like
crinoids, sea urchins, and abalone. The influence of topography is particularly evident on
rock walls, which can be common in some forests and beds, and are often dominated by
sessile invertebrates (figure 5. 1), while flat areas immediately above the walls are usually
dominated by seaweeds (Goldberg and Foster 2002, Miller and Etter 2008). Experiments
in central California indicate that this striking pattern in the distribution of the geniculate
coralline Calliarthron spp. results from a combination of poor algal recruitment and slow
growth (low light) on vertical surfaces (Goldberg and Foster 2002).
Considerable biogenic complexity is provided by algal holdfasts and blades, particularly
those of Macrocystis. Skottsberg (1907) was the first to highlight the diverse and abundant
fauna living in giant kelp holdfasts, and Andrews (1945) catalogued the inhabitants of
holdfasts in Monterey Bay, California, as did subsequent studies by Ghelardi (1971) in
southern California, Ojeda and Santelices (1984) in southern Chile, and Edgar (1987) in
Tasmania and at Macquarie Island. The entangled haptera provide a fairly rigid framework with spaces of around 1 cm or less. Holdfasts can be quite large. For example, the
largest holdfast sampled by Ghelardi (1971) had an average basal diameter of 83 cm and
was 68 cm tall, with a volume of 120,143 cm3. Large holdfasts have some habitat partitioning with older, dead, brittle haptera in the center surrounded by a ring of living haptera.
Ghelardi (1971) found that gammarid amphipods, polychaetes, and isopods were the most
abundant groups, and most animals occurred in both live and dead areas of holdfast, but
some were more abundant in one or the other. Species identities and abundances over a
range of holdfast sizes, in conjunction with observations from artificial holdfasts, indicated that the common taxa are found in all sizes and ages of holdfasts, that early colonists
are not facilitative, and that later colonists do not displace the early colonists.
Holdfasts appear simply to accumulate species and individuals as they grow. Holdfasts sampled in Chile by Ojeda and Santelices (1984) were smaller than those in California (largest = 15,000 cm3) and contained only 53 taxa, with sea urchins, polychaetes,
and crabs being most abundant. Although less diverse, assemblage dynamics were similar to those found by Ghelardi (1971). Taxa accumulated rapidly and began to level off
at holdfast volumes around 3000 cm3. Faunal composition and colonization appeared
to be little affected by seasonality, and invertebrate species composition was similar to
nearby areas not occupied by holdfasts. This and rapid colonization suggest that source
populations are local.

126

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

Feeding relationships among the holdfast fauna are poorly known, including whether
some of the inhabitants move to the surface of the holdfast or elsewhere to feed. Many of
the major taxonomic groups are detrital feeders, so the primary source of food is likely to
be detritus that accumulates on and in the holdfast. This faunal composition is similar to
that in other relatively hard, complex algal structures where isotopic analyses have shown
that the food webs are largely detrital-based, with detritus in the form of sedimented particulate organic matter (Grall et al. 2006, Schaal et al. 2012). It is likely that the base of the
food web in giant kelp holdfasts is similar but this remains to be investigated. Sea urchins
(Tegner et al. “Sea urchin cavitation” 1995) and isopods (Barrales and Lobban 1975), however, may feed on haptera, leading to increased dislodgement of giant kelp during storms.
Benthic habitats are also created by other algae in giant kelp forests, especially those
with relatively stiff, densely packed branches such as geniculate corallines. Dearn (1987)
used a suction dredge to sample the fauna in 10–15 cm tall mats of Calliarthron spp.
in the giant kelp forest at Stillwater Cove (figure 5.2D), and found 178 invertebrate taxa
from 12 phyla, with a mean density of nearly 300 individuals per 625 cm−2. The faunal
assemblage was very similar to that found in giant kelp holdfasts, and a similar fauna
developed in artificial (plastic) mats. As in holdfasts, the fauna in these mats appear
to result from mat structure that provides microhabitats and accumulates detrital and
planktonic food. Canopy removal experiments in Tasmania by Edgar et al. (2004) have
also shown that these and other large canopy-forming algae can affect the abundance of
species by providing a refuge from predators and sources of food.

H A B I TAT A S S O C I AT I O NS O F FISHE S

Understory algae and Macrocystis fronds in the water column and on the sea surface
provide habitat for numerous invertebrates and fishes. Coyer’s (1984) very thorough
seasonal study of mobile invertebrates on giant kelp fronds at Catalina Island in southern California found 114 species, with copepods and amphipods being most abundant.
Fronds also provide habitat for sessile species whose distribution on fronds varies with
their life history characteristics but is also influenced by location. The common bryozoan Membranipora membranacea was found by Bernstein and Jung (1979) to be most
abundant on fronds at the outer edges of a forest at Point Loma, California, because
larvae were depleted by settlement and fish predation as currents swept them through
the forest. Bryozoan abundance is also affected by water flow because it affects food
availability and feeding (Arkema et al. 2009). Ebeling et al. (1980) reviewed studies of
fish–habitat associations in California, and used cine-transects to sample the habitat
and distribution of 51 fish species at various locations and depths within mainland and
island kelp forests near Santa Barbara in southern California. The fishes segregated
into four general habitats plus a group of “commuters” that co-occurred throughout
the water column (figure 5.5). A similar study in a kelp forest with a cobble bottom near
San Diego found that giant kelp could at least partially provide the “Kelp Rock” habitat

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

127

SURFACE

COMMUTER
BOTTOM

POSITION IN WATER COLUMN

KELP ROCK

CANOPY

RO
C
KY

BO

H
IG
H

TT

O

R
BO ELIE
F

M

TT

O

M

TY SA
PE ND
Y

INNER MARGIN
FL

AT

INNER MARGIN

MIDDLE

OUTER MARGIN

POSITION RELATIVE KELP BED
figure 5.5
Daytime habitats occupied by particular groups of fishes in kelp forests near Santa Barbara,
California. Examples within each habitat include the following. Kelp Rock: blacksmith
(Chromis punctipinnis). Canopy: kelp surfperch (Brachyistius frenatus). Inner Margin: dwarf
surfperch (Micrometrus minimus). Bottom: lingcod (Ophiodon elongatus). Commuters are fishes
such as kelp bass (Paralabrax clathratus) that move between habitats.
source: Redrawn from Ebeling et al. (1980).

described by Ebeling et al. (1980) when bottom relief was low (Larson and DeMartini
1984). Reed et al. (2006—“Quantitative assessment”) found that rock cover could have
a larger effect than rock type on fish assemblages. Fishes in southern Chile also tend to
be associated with particular types of bottom topography and habitat (Moreno and Jara
1984). The general relationship between algal and fish assemblage structure, however,
is less clear. Holbrook et al. (1990) surveyed 26 reefs in southern California and concluded that algal structure (i.e., giant kelp density plus the abundance of foliose algae)
had little effect on fish species richness and composition. They argued that this was a
consequence of the generalized ecological requirements of many of the fishes which,

12 8

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

figure 5.6
Sketch of a portion of the Point Loma kelp forest showing patches of algae with characteristic
canopy guilds, including the floating canopy of giant kelp Macrocystis ‘pyrifera,’ the stipitate canopy
of the understory kelps Pterygophora californica and Eisenia arborea, the prostrate canopy of the kelp
Laminaria farlowii and the fucoid Stephanocystis (=Cystoseira) osmundacea), and patches of turf and
nongeniculate (crustose) coralline algae.
source: From Dayton et al. (1984).

in turn, reflected the highly dynamic nature of algal composition on the reefs. In contrast, Pérez-Matus et al. (2007) found higher fish species diversity at sites with both
Macrocystis ‘integrifolia’ and Lessonia trabeculata in northern Chile. Fish assemblage
structure also varied with depth, a likely reflection of changes in microhabitats.

PATC HE S

Benthic species commonly have aggregated distributions within kelp forest habitats
(e.g., Rosenthal et al. 1974), and dense aggregations are referred to as “patches.” Patches
composed of dense stands of various seaweeds and sea urchins at scales from around
1 m2 and larger are particularly common. Dayton et al. (1984) described these at Point
Loma, the most visually obvious being discrete stands of Macrocystis, long-lived understory kelps, and areas with high densities of sea urchins and nongeniculate coralline
algae (figure 5.6). Patches often occur in particular topographic settings. An example
is the understory kelp Pterygophora californica that occurs in dense stands on elevated
plateaus in Stillwater Cove. Its shading in this habitat reduces the abundance of giant

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

129

kelp, but giant kelp is still abundant as it recruits in other patches where P. californica is
not as dense (Reed and Foster 1984). The removal of algal canopies in eastern Tasmania,
including that of giant kelp at one site, caused very little change in associated algae, a
result attributed to the high cover and mosaic nature of bottom cover “turf” composed of
green (Caulerpa spp.) and foliose red algae, and geniculate corallines (Edgar et al. 2004)
that were apparently little affected by changes in light. Spatial variation also occurs
within patches, an essential feature driving patch dynamics as physical and biological
disturbances remove organisms or clear the substratum, initiating succession.

TE MP O R AL VA R I ATI O N

Previous discussion has focused on the spatial variation that characterizes kelp forests
at patch-to-geographic scales. Based on the extant historical information (mostly from
California) beginning in the early 1900s, long-term, persistent changes in kelp forest
size have occurred at sites in British Columbia and central California as a result of sea
urchin mortalities from predation by expanding sea otter populations, and disease (see
Community discussions above; review for California in Laur et al. 1988). Fish (especially large ones) and abalone populations have also declined due to fishing (Foster and
Schiel 2010; see Chapters 11 and 12), and some large kelp forests in southern California
have declined due to deterioration in water and benthic quality associated with coastal
development and sewage discharge (Schiel and Foster 1992, Foster and Schiel 2010).
The considerable literature on these more persistent changes, often at only a few sites
and driven by anthropogenic disturbance, has tended to diminish an appreciation of
the naturally dynamic nature of kelp forest communities and the coastal environments
where they occur. These dynamics are discussed below.
Before discussing temporal variation, however, it is necessary to comment on the
methods used to assess it in conjunction with spatial variation. The extensive canopy of
most giant kelp forests on the sea surface allows a measure of Macrocystis abundance
as canopy cover, without getting wet. Canopy areas were fi rst measured in California
and Australia from boats that moved around canopy boundaries while taking positions
using triangulation from measured landmarks, sextants, and other methods, and then
calculating the area within (Crandall 1915, Cribb 1954). In both countries, boats were
soon replaced by aerial photographic surveys from planes, using landmarks to scale
the photos. This method can survey large areas of coastline relatively rapidly and take
account of open patches within canopies, which is difficult to do from a boat.
Photosynthesizing algae reflect strongly in the infrared portion of the light spectrum,
while seawater absorbs strongly at these wavelengths, so infrared photos give the best
resolution. For consistency, current methods take photos only on clear days with a swell
less than 1.5 m, tides of +0.3 m or less, and a sun angle of greater than 30° above nadir (e.g.,
MBC 2013). Similar results can be obtained using multispectral sensors. Deysher (1993)
reviewed the pros and cons of various methods, including satellite images, for giant kelp

13 0

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

canopy assessments in southern California, and Anderson et al. (2007) used and evaluated
various methods for other kelps that reach the sea surface in southwestern South Africa.
Suitable cameras could also be used on unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Repeated surveys have provided a rich record of canopy dynamics in southern California and Tasmania
that can be correlated with various environmental phenomena (e.g., figure 10.1). These
aerial methods, however, may be replaced by images from satellites (see figure 11.11). Landsat 5 and successors with a multispectral Thematic Mapper (TM) have resolutions of 30 m
or less and can scan the entire earth every 16 days. To date, the most thorough use of this
method was by Cavanaugh et al. (2011) who analyzed 25 years of Landsat images with high
resolution in the near-infrared (760–900 nm), combined with area-per-biomass relationships obtained in the field, to examine local to regional variation in the Santa Barbara, California, area. This method requires considerable image processing but has the potential to
track changes in giant kelp canopy area and biomass worldwide.
The advent of scuba in the 1950s (see Chapter 1, History of Research) allowed in situ
assessment of plant and frond densities and plant sizes, measurements that have been
essential for demographic studies (Chapter 4). They are usually done in conjunction with
assessment of the cover and density of other organisms occurring with giant kelp. Giant
kelp frond and plant densities have also been determined using sonar (e.g., Grove et al.
2002). Studies focused on demography or spatial and temporal dynamics of the community, therefore, have generally used in situ methods and occasionally sonar, whereas
those concerned with giant kelp abundance, for example as it relates to harvesting potential or responses to climatic variables, have increasingly used remote sensing methods.

PATC HE S W I T HIN FO RE S T S

The dynamics of patches within a kelp forest have been the focus of over 40 years of study
by Dayton and colleagues, primarily at Point Loma (e.g., Dayton and Tegner 1984, Dayton et
al. 1984, 1992). Repeated sampling along fixed transects during and after several changes
in ocean climate have shown a dynamic patch structure driven by complex interactions
related to the differential effects of various disturbances such as large waves, low nutrients,
and sea urchin grazing, the life history features of particular species, and interactions
among species. Further variation occurred during successional events after disturbances,
depending on the degree of disturbance and the ability of potential colonists to recruit and
survive, an ability affected by subsequent ocean climate and interactions among colonists.
Macrocystis had especially strong effects on understory algal patches through its ability to
affect light on the bottom. Patch survivorship varied among species, with patches of some
understory kelps persisting for over 10 years (see Chapter 4). These studies indicate that,
at least at Point Loma, large-scale oceanographic events can have great effects on the entire
forest but recovery is driven by the aggregate of diverse responses of patches.
A very common feature of kelp forests are patches created by sea urchin grazing (see
discussion of forests within provinces above). Foster and Schiel (1988) summarized the

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

131

size of these patches based on information from 224 surveys done outside the range of sea
otters in California. Patches within these sites ranged in size from <1 m2 around crevices
and depressions where urchins aggregate to thousands of square meters, where abundant
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus and S. franciscanus actively forage. The great majority (86%)
of patches, however, were between 1 and 10 m2. The larger patches are formed when
drift algae are reduced, inducing a change in sea urchin behavior from passive to active
foraging (e.g., Ebeling et al. 1985, Harrold and Reed 1985) although large recruitment
events of sea urchins may also be important (Watanabe and Harrold 1991). In California,
conditions favoring kelp recruitment (Harrold and Reed 1985) or storms that remove the
exposed sea urchins (Ebeling et al. 1985, Watanabe and Harrold 1991) commonly result
in urchin-patch longevity of only a few years (Foster and Schiel 1988, Graham 2004).
Such patches are dominated by sea urchins and nongeniculate coralline algae, and usually
“deforested” (with few or no large kelps), but they are not necessarily “barren” of other
algae and invertebrates. Graham (2004), for example, used data from repeated surveys of
many sites around the Channel Islands off southern California, and found that of a total
of 275 common species, only 25 were absent from areas characterized as deforested.
These within-forest dynamics also occur at smaller scales, as Foster (1975b) found
using concrete blocks placed within a kelp forest. The subsequent biological composition on this initially unoccupied substratum changed with successional age and the
time of clearing. Most algae (including Macrocystis) and many sessile invertebrates
could be initial colonizers, depending on when the blocks were placed into the forest,
and changes in dominance over time were largely the result of differences in growth
rates and apparent competitive success. The presence of topographic edges at the scale
of centimeters enhanced giant kelp recruitment, illustrating even smaller-scale patch
structure resulting from turbulent flows around microsites.
Complete clearings within forests are not unusual, and they occur at various scales
during large wave events that scour the bottom, uncover rock buried by sand, overturn
boulders, and expose new surfaces by fracturing and moving rock (Ebeling et al. 1985,
Dayton et al. 1989). As argued by Foster and Schiel (1993), numerous small areas among
and within patches are usually available for recruitment, and recruitment success per
area need not be high to produce adult Macrocystis densities of around 1 plant per 10 m2
that characterizes a well-developed forest in southern California (see Chapter 4, Demography). Given these features, combined with a massive reproductive output, survivorship
of microscopic stages for at least a few months, and the increase in light on the bottom
when surface canopies are thinned or removed, the ability of Macrocystis populations to
recover rapidly and persist should be expected, and a lack of recovery would be surprising.

EL NIÑ O EFFEC T S

A growing number of studies have documented local and regional spatial changes at
seasonal and interannual time scales, particularly in California and Baja California.

13 2

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

The changes that have been most studied were initiated by high temperature and lownutrient conditions, large waves associated with El Niños, and large wave events from
storms (e.g., waves with a height around 6 m and period greater than 17 sec; Ebeling
et al. 1985, Tegner and Dayton 1987). El Niños are often followed by La Niña periods
with cold, nutrient-rich water that affects recovery of northern hemisphere populations
(reviews in Tegner and Dayton 1987, Edwards 2004). The two most consistent effects of
these disturbances are the severe depletion or elimination of giant kelp, and its generally
rapid recovery. This was first noted in southern California after the 1957–1959 El Niño,
but the effects were confounded by those from sewage discharge and other anthropogenic influences (review in Foster and Schiel 2010). By the time of the next large El Niño
in 1982–1983, the effects of a large El Niño alone could be better assessed. The kelp
forest at San Onofre, north of San Diego, illustrates many of the effects of high temperature and low-nutrient conditions. Fixed plots within this forest have been sampled since
1976 (to at least 2013) as part of monitoring for the effects of the once-through cooling
system at the San Onofre nuclear power plant (e.g., SCE 2001). Most large organisms
sampled, including giant kelp, severely declined after the 1982–1983 El Niño, with giant
and understory kelp recovery occurring within 2–4 years but larger sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus spp.) taking 10 years (figure 5.7). The bat star, Patiria miniata, a ubiquitous
inhabitant of California kelp forests that can be killed by disease at high water temperatures (Tegner and Dayton 1987), had not recovered after 20 years. In contrast, another
echinoderm, the white urchin Lytechinus pictus (=anamesus), recruited in high numbers
during the El Niño but went to near zero within 9 years. Subsequent El Niños generated
great declines in Macrocystis, which always recovered within a few years, whereas the
understory kelp Pterygophora underwent a general decline after repeated events (figure
5.7). The 1982–1983 El Niño essentially eliminated Macrocystis and understory algae
(with the exception of nongeniculate corallines) within a giant kelp forest at Catalina
Island off southern California but had little effect on other kelps and associated species
in shallow (<3 m) and deep (>25 m) water above and below the giant kelp forest (Foster
and Schiel 1993). Various ephemeral algae and the invasive fucoid Sargassum muticum
colonized the area, but the formerly abundant species recolonized and the Macrocystis
forest recovered in around 4 years. Macrocystis populations at their southern limit in the
northeast Pacific are strongly affected by El Niños but generally recover in 1–2 years.
In this area, the understory kelp Eisenia arborea can inhibit Macrocystis recovery and, at
some sites with little suitable substratum and dense stands of Eisenia, this inhibition
may last for 20 years (review in Edwards and Hernández-Carmona 2005).
In central California, the 1982–1983 El Niño caused relatively minor changes in
temperature and nutrients but generated exceptionally large storm waves (review in
Foster and Schiel 1985). We observed that many entire Macrocystis plants were removed
in Stillwater Cove, and the few small fronds on plants that remained were eliminated
by turban snails whose density greatly increased on the remaining plants when much
of their habitat, giant kelp fronds, was removed. Strong wave surges stripped the blades

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

133

0.5

A. Macrocystis (>2 m in total length)

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Number per m2 (mean ± SE)

0.0
10.0

B. Pterygophora californica

8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
3.5

C. Echinoderms

3.0

Strongylocentrotus
Patiria
Lytechinus

25
20

2.0

15

1.5

10

1.0
5

0.5
0.0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

0
2000

figure 5.7
Temporal variation of common species in the kelp forests at San Onofre, near San
Diego, California (A–C), and at Caleta Constitución, Antofagasta, Chile (D–F). San
Onofre data are means (±1 SD) of counts in six stations and Caleta Constitución data
(Panels D, E) are from counts along four transects perpendicular to shore; Panel F is
from 20 quadrats in the kelp forest. Arrows and boxes indicate strong El Niño events.
note: See text for species and ecomorphs.
source: Data from SCE (2001) and Vásquez et al. (2006).

Lytechinus

2.5

3

D. Macrocystis adults

Number per m2

2.5
ENSO

2
1.5
1
0.5

Number per m2

0
1.5

E. Lessonia adults

1

ENSO

0.5

0

Number per 0.25 m2

20

F. Sea urchins

Tetrapygus niger
Loxechinus albus

15

ENSO

10
5

0
1996

1997

1998

2000

2001

2002

2004

figure 5.7 continued

from the understory kelp Pterygophora californica, dislodging some plants, and the
bottom was scoured of most sessile animals. Coralline algal mats survived but were
thinned. Blooms of the annual foliose brown alga Desmarestia ligulata developed during
spring and summer following the massive storm disturbance, with some recruitment
of Macrocystis and Pterygophora. Desmarestia then declined, and further recruitment
and growth of kelps resulted in the return of pre-disturbance patterns of abundance

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

13 5

and distribution by the summer of 1984, 1.5 years after the disturbance. With the exceptions of the near elimination of adult Macrocystis, changes in turban snail grazing, and
Desmarestia blooms, these temporal changes were similar to those of typical seasonal
changes at this site that result from disturbance by winter storms (Foster 1982, Reed
and Foster 1984). At many wave-exposed sites in central California south of Monterey,
the surface canopy changed from Macrocystis to Nereocystis luetkeana in the summer–
autumn of 1983, but had changed back to Macrocystis by 1985 (M. Foster, pers. obs.).
Foster and VanBlaricom (2001) found abundant bladeless stipes of the understory kelps
Laminaria setchellii and P. californica beneath giant kelp canopies during surveys of this
region in 1985, suggesting these species also increased after the El Niño but were killed
by lack of light when giant kelp returned. Large waves alone can also cause changes in
giant kelp forests in southern California, as shown by Ebeling et al. (1985) at Naples
Reef near Santa Barbara. A large wave event in 1980 removed most giant kelp from the
reef, and the consequent reduction in drift food caused sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus
spp.) to switch from passive drift feeding to active foraging, removing most other algae
except nongeniculate corallines. This caused a decline in surfperches that feed on invertebrates in the understory. A second storm in 1983 removed most of the exposed sea
urchins, and giant kelp recolonized rapidly, especially on new rock surfaces exposed by
the storm. As Ebeling et al. (1985) concluded, storm effects can clearly vary depending
on community structure prior to a disturbance.
The loss and recovery of giant kelp associated with the 1982–1983 El Niño in California indicated that effects varied on regional scales, probably due to large-scale variation
in the types and severity of disturbances among forests in Baja California, southern
California, and central California. The exceptionally broadscale, multisite surveys of
Edwards (2004) before and after the 1997–1998 El Niño thoroughly documented these
differences and showed that the regional effects of El Niños on giant kelp abundance can
supersede processes affecting local variation. Recovery, however, was more variable at
smaller scales, presumably a reflection of variation in local physical conditions, maturity
of the giant kelp stand prior to disturbance, sources of propagules, and interactions with
other members of the community. Perhaps the most remarkable result of this study, as
well as previous site-specific investigations, is that regardless of region and amount of
loss, giant kelp is generally able to recover within 2 years.
The oceanography from northern Chile to the coast of southern Peru is generally
similar to that from southern California into Pacific Baja California where Macrocystis is
concentrated in areas of upwelling within gradually warming coastal currents. Like its
counterpart in the northeast Pacific, this area of the southeast Pacific is greatly affected
by El Niños. The 1982–1983 El Niño resulted in the elimination of many Macrocystis
‘integrifolia’ forests and a severe reduction in the large kelp Lessonia nigrescens, which
often dominates the low intertidal above giant kelp (Camus 1994, Fernández et al. 1999,
Vásquez et al. 2006). Although some Macrocystis recruitment occurred the year following the 1982–1983 El Niño, recovery of giant kelp took up to 10 years, and L. nigrescens

13 6

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

longer, probably due to differences in dispersal from remnant populations (Martínez
et al. 2003). The effects of the 1997–1998 El Niño were not as severe, but revealed complex dynamics related to upwelling and changes in grazers and predators (figure 5.7).
The surveys of kelps and large benthic invertebrates by Vásquez et al. (2006) in a kelp
forest at Caleta Constitución in northern Chile between 1996 and 2004 revealed little
effect of the El Niño on M. ‘integrifolia’ but large increases in recruitment and survival
of the sea urchin Tetrapygus niger during the La Niña that followed. Grazing by this
sea urchin had a greater effect on giant kelp abundance than during the El Niño, when
effects were mitigated by local upwelling. The greater survival of T. niger during the
La Niña was attributed to reduced predation by sea stars, whose diet and distribution
changed after the El Niño. Giant kelp re-established by 2003 after a decline in T. niger,
an effect attributed to the return of predatory sea stars to their former distribution and
diet. The abundance of the kelp L. trabeculata and the sea urchin Loxechinus albus did
not vary greatly during the study period (figure 5.7), and overall species richness in the
forest remained relatively constant during the study period.

LO N G -T ER M P ER SIS T EN C E

Most long-term studies have been done in southern California where scuba first became
widely used in kelp forests, and where harvesting and the effects of sewage discharge
stimulated research (Chapter 1, History of Research). There are also long records for
Tasmania, particularly from aerial photographs from 1946–2007, which have shown a
general decline in giant kelp (Johnson et al. 2011; discussed in Chapter 13).
In California, the pioneering, 7-year study by Rosenthal et al. (1974) of the Del Mar
kelp forest north of San Diego was the first to examine longer-term variation in the kelp
forest community. There were no El Niños during the study and the forest exhibited
dynamic stability. Adult Macrocystis abundance varied as mortality of large, old plants
from storms was followed by recruitment. With this short-term exception, along with
those of a few sessile invertebrates that either declined, increased, or varied in abundance annually, the composition of the forest stayed remarkably stable over the years of
the study.
The longest set of giant kelp forest observations was begun by Neushul and colleagues in a giant kelp forest on the southwest end of Anacapa Island, 20 km offshore
from southern California (Neushul et al. 1967). They semiquantitatively documented
the distribution and abundance of giant kelp and other conspicuous organisms along a
700 m long transect from the intertidal zone to a depth of 34 m in 1965–1966. The site
was observed and described again from 1981 through 1987 by Ambrose et al. (1993) and
then by Carroll et al. (2000) from 1988 through 1998. In the mid-1960s, Macrocystis
was abundant at depths from 8 to 31 m, with different species of stipitate kelps above
8 m (Eisenia arborea) and below 31 m (Agarum fimbriatum). Red and purple sea urchins
(Strongylocentrotus spp.) were common from the intertidal zone to 13 m depth, and the

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

13 7

white urchin Lytechinus pictus (=anamesus) from 13 m to the end of the transect, but
extensively grazed areas were not apparent. By 1981, giant kelp occurred only above 8 m,
with the rest of the transect dominated by Strongylocentrotus spp. in shallower water and
L. pictus in deeper water, and with much of the bottom extensively grazed and covered
by nongeniculate coralline algae. Extensive recruitment of giant kelp was seen to at least
20 m depth in 1985 during the La Niña that followed the 1983–1984 El Niño, but by 1987
the composition of the site again became similar to its state in 1981. By 1998 the entire
transect was mostly devoid of kelp, sea urchins were abundant above 18 m depth, and
brittle stars (Ophiothrix spiculata) had become dominant below 18 m, covering nearly
100% of the bottom.
Surface waters around this part of Anacapa Island are warmer and more affected by
El Niños than islands to the east, and the island is biogeographically more similar to
islands to the south (Murray et al. 1980, Hamilton et al. 2010). Ambrose et al. (1993)
and Carroll et al. (2000) suggested the large changes observed over 35 years were likely
due to extended periods of warm water and low nutrients unfavorable to giant kelp,
and possibly enhancing recruitment of some echinoderms, with occasional pulses of
cooler, nutrient-rich water favorable to giant kelp. Furthermore, during periods when
giant kelp can re-establish, its productivity may not be sufficient to offset losses from
high grazer densities.
The information from these and other studies on the recovery from El Niños indicates that giant kelp and associated species in California recover from most natural
disturbances, even large ones like El Niños, within 1–10 years, which is not unusual
for marine communities (Foster et al. 1988, Jones and Schmitz 2009) composed of
many species with rapid growth, relatively short life spans, and widely dispersed spores
and larvae. Moreover, historical records from explorers and more modern records from
some areas in California show that forests have persisted in the same locations for
hundreds of years. Connell and Sousa (1983) argued that populations should be considered to have a stable equilibrium point only if they persist longer than their turnover
times (i.e., when all adults are replaced) in an area large enough that replacement comes
from within. Although red sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus franciscanus) can live over
100 years (Ebert and Southon 2003) and many nongeniculate corallines are probably
long-lived (Frantz et al. 2005), the life span of Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ is less than 10 years
and the life spans of many longer-lived associated species are only in the order of tens of
years, well within known persistence times of populations. This may not be the case in
Tasmania where a persistent change in oceanographic conditions (Johnson et al. 2011)
may prevent recovery.
Cavanaugh et al. (2013) combined satellite-derived biomass estimates of individual
kelp stands, wave, and sea-surface temperature data (as a proxy for nutrients), sea urchin
abundance, and giant kelp recruitment in an effort to link population and landscape
ecology and reveal factors that may affect giant kelp population dynamics at different spatial scales. The data were obtained from repeated sampling of kelp forests over

13 8

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

550 km including the coast around Santa Barbara and northward, as well as offshore
islands. Variables were measured several times within the years 2000–2011. Additional
data were used to determine the relationship between satellite images of canopies and
kelp canopy biomass (Cavanaugh et al. 2010, 2011). These showed the strong relationship between the biomass of giant kelp and significant wave height of winter storms
north of Point Conception, as suggested by previous small-scale studies (e.g., Kimura
and Foster 1984). Cavanaugh et al. (2013) found declines in population synchrony (similarities in giant kelp biomass within and among stands) at scales of 50 m to 1.3 km, correlated with variation in sea urchin abundance and giant kelp recruitment, at scales of
1.3–172 km, which was most strongly related to differences in wave disturbance. These
studies are noteworthy not only for their innovative use of remote sensing and linking
of population and landscape scales, but also because they provide a much needed spatial context for evaluating the relative importance of recruitment, grazing, and storm
disturbance. It is likely that the findings may differ in other regions, depending on their
particular biological and oceanographic settings (see Argentinean and some Chilean
giant kelp forests discussed previously), but the approach of Cavanaugh and colleagues,
applied to other regions, holds great promise for providing the information needed for
a global understanding of the causes of giant kelp population dynamics and, eventually,
the effects of these on giant kelp communities.

D I VE R S IT Y

The causes of differences in diversity among giant kelp forests are best considered at
different spatial and temporal scales. On a large spatial scale, Darwin (1839) observed
that “we see the fucus [Macrocystis] possessing a wider range than the animals that use
it as an abode,” referring to differences in the species occurring with giant kelp among
the now recognized biogeographic provinces in Chile. It is clear from the community
descriptions in the previous section that differences in diversity or species richness
of giant kelp forests among provinces is a function of isolation, how long they were
isolated, ocean climate, frequency of large-scale disturbances (such as glaciation), and
evolutionary history of each province as well as some locations within it. An example
of such influences is the 50 or so species of fishes in southern California kelp forests
compared to three at the subantarctic Marion Island.
The causes of variation in species composition among forests within a region are also
implicit in the community descriptions. In this case, assuming all possible species that
occur in forests within a region could occur in a particular forest, the question becomes:
in what ways are some local forests more diverse than others? Total diversity of macroorganisms alone has never been rigorously assessed at multiple sites within a region,
but available quantitative information and qualitative observations indicate that at a
primary level, habitat diversity and persistence related to substratum hardness and topography are particularly important, as is water quality. For instance, sites with high-relief

GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

13 9

and topographically complex hard rock in relatively clear water with low sedimentation
generally appear to be the most diverse (e.g., the examples above of southern California
islands vs. the mainland and Stillwater Cove vs. Sand Hill Bluff ). At a secondary level
within a site, diversity is no doubt affected by the structure of some of the community
members that can occupy the site (e.g., coralline mats) and disturbance at various scales
(Cowen et al. 1982, Dayton et al. 1984), including disturbance caused by episodes of sea
urchin grazing (Byrnes et al. 2013). These studies, observations, and experiments, and
those discussed in Chapter 7, show that sessile animals and understory algae can compete for space, and that surface canopies of giant kelp can reduce understory algae via
reduction in light. Connell’s insightful 1978 paper argued that intermediate disturbance
is essential to maintaining diversity in tropical rain forests and coral reefs as it removes
dominant competitors, thereby reducing competitive exclusion. The argument seems
quite applicable to giant kelp forests.

Community studies have made a major contribution to our knowledge of many local
giant kelp forests and, when viewed in aggregate within and across regions, have revealed
important general processes affecting species throughout their distributional range.
Such studies have established that giant kelp occurs with many different assemblages of
associated species in areas with different ages, evolutionary histories, and disturbances.
There is no universal giant kelp community, and the most important structuring processes are those of storms and high temperatures / low nutrients on giant kelp, and the
direct and indirect effects of these on associated species. Even the presence of giant kelp
communities in similar coastal locations can be caused by different oceanographic and
coastal features, such as being in the lee of headlands (e.g., Sand Hill Bluff ) or associated with localized upwelling (e.g., Baja California). Appreciating such wide variation in
what we understand as “giant kelp communities” is truly a case of celebrating diversity.

14 0

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

6
DETACHED GIANT KELP
COMMUNITIES, PRODUCTION,
AND FOOD / CONTROL WEBS
In regions with high marine macrophyte production and / or
kelp forests the community structure of sandy beach macrofauna
is closely linked with the input and fate of macrophyte wrack.
—Dugan et al. (2003)

We still face a dilemma: is it appropriate to say that herbivory during early
successional stages is irrelevant, or should we present estimates of per capita
interaction strength and expect them to be general?
—Sala and Dayton (2011)

D E TACHE D GIANT KE LP CO MM UNITIE S

Kelp populations are exceptionally productive and an estimated 80% of the productivity
(excluding dissolved organic carbon) ends up as detached detritus (review in Krumhansl and Scheibling 2012). Giant kelp is no exception, and it is therefore not surprising that detritus from Macrocystis, moved by currents and wind, can be an important
source of habitat, food, and nutrients for other communities and components within
kelp forests. Large size and distribution throughout the water column make fronds and
entire Macrocystis plants especially vulnerable to detachment from waves and surge, and
grazing concentrated in and above the holdfast results in further losses (e.g., Tegner
et al. 1995—“Sea urchin cavitation”). These processes, plus loss of tissue from natural
senescence (Rodriguez et al. 2013), can release massive amounts of giant kelp detritus
into the water. Hobday (2000b), for example, estimated that 20–40% of adult plants
were lost from the Point Loma kelp forest during winter storms, and Gerard (1976)
estimated over 60% of the giant kelp production in a relatively protected kelp forest in
Monterey Bay became detritus. Much of this remains buoyant by floats on the blades
and ends up either onshore or else drifting in currents and wind offshore where it may
lose buoyancy and sink (figure 6.1). Pieces of kelp generated within the kelp forest often

141

Giant kelp raft

Beach wrack

4.

SAND
3.
Giant kelp ‘beach’

1.

Detritus in forest
2.
ROCK
Canyon and shelf detritus

Movement of detritus
Remineralization
of nutrients

1. Fish feeding on associated invertebrates.
2. Sea urchin feeding on detritus.
3. Microfauna feeding on detritus and microbes.
4. Bird feeding on amphipods and insects.
figure 6.1
Stylized depiction of the movement and use of giant kelp detritus. Floating rafts are occupied by
numerous species. As kelp gets washed up onshore as wrack or sinks to the sea floor, it is eaten
by a wide range of species.

lack floats, or have floats that have lost their buoyancy, and end up on the bottom where
they may remain or be transported to other benthic areas. The amounts and transport
of floating detritus were commonly observed by early explorers including Hooker (1847)
who noted giant kelp’s “wandering habits,” that some waters “literally swarm with Macrocystis,” and a Falkland Island beach “lined for miles with entangled masses.” Such
inputs, common in marine communities where transport via various water motions can
blur boundaries, are currently referred to as “subsidies” (review in Polis et al. 1997), but
detached giant kelp can have very large effects on other habitats, effects that suggest it
could be considered a foundation species as it is when attached within a forest.

GI A N T K EL P R A F T S

Floating masses of giant kelp, often referred to as “rafts” or “paddies,” can constitute a
large proportion of objects that drift on the sea surface where giant kelp occurs (review
in Thiel and Gutow 2005a). In the extreme, storms detach entire plants that may become
entangled with other plants and cause their detachment (Rosenthal et al. 1974). When
transported offshore, these entwined plants can form rafts with surface areas exceeding
hundreds of square meters (Harrold and Lisin 1989) with denuded fronds and holdfasts
hanging several meters below the surface (Kingsford 1995). Depending on how long they
persist, rafts can be composed of a mix of their original associates from the kelp forest and
new pelagic colonizers. The review of Thiel and Gutow (2005b) noted over 1200 species

14 2

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

associated with rafting objects of all types, and Hobday (2000c) reported 150 macrofaunal
species associated with giant kelp rafts in southern California. The initial floating giant
kelp community is composed of giant kelp and other plants, including some without floats
that are attached to the holdfast or wrapped up in the raft. It also includes animals living
in the holdfast and on the fronds. Even the odd terrestrial animal can go rafting; Prescott
(1959) reported a jackrabbit on a large raft of giant kelp offshore in southern California.
Vásquez (1993) examined changes after dislodgement in the southern California holdfast
fauna by removing holdfasts from the benthos and mooring them in the water column.
The abundance of individuals in the most abundant faunal groups, such as polychaetes
and ophiuroids, greatly declined within 20 days, but a few individuals from all groups
remained until around 100 days when the holdfasts began to disintegrate. Isopods and
amphipods were the exception, increasing later in the experiment, probably because they
are brooders and reproduce inside holdfasts. In contrast, the fauna in the very diverse
(172 species) Tasmanian kelp forest holdfasts studied by Edgar (1987) did not greatly
decline after dislodgement and holdfasts survived over 190 days, eventually succumbing
to grazing by isopods and amphipods. Unattached giant kelp can grow in protected inlets
(Gerard and Kirkman 1984) and also while floating in the open sea, as indicated by their
physiological performance (Rothäusler et al. 2011) and elongated haptera. However, the
relatively low nutrients in the surface waters of the open ocean may reduce growth below
the ability to compensate for grazing losses or may contribute to frond deterioration.
Depending on their time at sea, rafts can be colonized by numerous pelagic invertebrates (e.g., gooseneck barnacles, Lepas spp.) as well as larval, juvenile, and adult fishes
(Mitchell and Hunter 1970, Kingsford 1995, review in Thiel and Gutow 2005b). The
sessile animals and smaller fishes feed on plankton that might be considered a subsidy
from the surrounding pelagic community. Hobday (2000c) considered giant kelp rafts
in southern California waters as floating islands, but, contrary to predictions from island
biogeography, species richness varied little with raft age because as kelp forest species
declined, recruitment of pelagic species increased. Diversity did increase with raft weight.
Rafts of giant kelp and other floating seaweeds contribute to the transport of larval
and juvenile fishes to nearshore habitats (Kingsford and Choat 1985, Kingsford 1995).
Rafting giant kelp and associated invertebrates and small fishes are also a source of
food for larger, grazing, and predatory fishes that accumulate around rafts (Mitchell and
Hunter 1970; figure 6.2). Large predatory jacks, such as the yellowtail Seriola lalandi
in southern California, may be attracted to giant kelp rafts because of their structure
(similar to FADs) or to feed on smaller fishes there. These highly prized sport fishes
make giant kelp rafts productive fishing sites (Waters 2002).
Life span, currents, winds, and landing sites interact to affect how far giant kelp rafts
travel. Like Vásquez (1993), Hobday (2000a) estimated a raft life span of 100 days, based
on changes in the lengths of blades while floating. He also found that artificial drifters
designed to mimic kelp raft movement were transported a maximum of around 1000 km
in 40 days in southern California and therefore could be transported to all of the mainland

DETACHED GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

143

figure 6.2
School of halfmoon (Medialuna californiensis) around a raft of detached giant
kelp adrift off southern California. Fishes are 20–30 cm long.
source: Photo courtesy of Ron J. McPeak, UCSB Library Digital Collection.

and offshore islands. The distribution and genetics of giant kelp populations in the Southern Ocean suggest that once giant kelp migrated from the northeast Pacific to southern
South America, initial colonization of the rest of the southern hemisphere occurred via
very long distance dispersal in the Antarctic Circumpolar and related currents (see Chapter
1, Biogeography). While the points of origin may vary, this scenario is also likely for the
large, buoyant fucoid Durvillaea antarctica (Fraser et al. 2009) and attached invertebrates
like the brooding bivalve Gaimardia trapsina (Helmuth et al. 1994). Pearse et al. (2009)
argued that long-distance dispersal of brooding invertebrates is the most likely reason for
their abundance in Antarctica, and kelp rafts may have provided the dispersal vector. The
probability of long-distance dispersal also seems reasonable based on raft life span and current velocities. The surface waters of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current move at around
0.5 m sec−1 (Fyfe and Saenko 2005) or about 43 km day−1. Therefore, this current alone
(neglecting wind which also moves rafts; e.g., Harrold and Lisin 1989) could transport a
kelp raft over 4000 km in 100 days, well within the distances between most island groups
in the Southern Ocean. With a longer life, as suggested by Edgar (1987), and / or some help
from the wind, rafts could also drift over the 5700 km stretch of open ocean from Kerguelen
Island to Tasmania. Giant kelp rafts can clearly support a diverse fauna and are an important, long-distance dispersal mechanism for giant kelp and its associated flora and fauna.

GI A N T K EL P “ B E AC HE S ”

Giant kelp rafts deposited onshore become wrack (figure 6.1). With the exception of
pieces of wrack observed being eaten by intertidal sea urchins, turban snails, and other

14 4

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

grazers, the effects of giant kelp wrack on rocky intertidal shores are poorly known.
They may be large in some areas, as suggested by Bustamante et al. (1995) who found
other species of drift kelp to be a major contributor to grazer populations on South
African rocky shores. Enormous piles of wrack can accumulate on sandy beaches (figure
2.2), where they can be an important part of sandy beach communities. Sandy beaches
are complex, very dynamic systems (McLachlan and Brown 2006), and kelp detritus can
be an important source of food (review in Krumhansl and Scheibling 2012).
We will focus here on the animal assemblages associated with giant kelp wrack based
primarily on studies in California where most research has been done. Zobell’s (1971)
thorough, 12-year study of wrack abundance on southern California beaches near giant
kelp forests found that in winter, masses of wrack composed primarily of giant kelp
along 150 m of beach could attain volumes of 190 m3. Abundance was highly variable,
however, with little to none in late spring through early autumn. This seasonal cycle of
beach-cast kelp related to storms and thinning of giant kelp is like that of raft production, and appears typical (Yaninek 1980, Marsden 1991), as does local variation among
beaches in the amount of wrack deposited at any one time (Zobell 1971, Dugan et al.
2011). Moreover, wrack abundance can change dramatically after first arriving on a
beach, with the bulk of it returning to the sea during the next high tide unless stranded
high on the beach when the tides are decreasing. Zobell (1971) estimated an average of
less than 10% remained “beyond the reach of high water, buried by sand, or otherwise
entrapped.” Material transported off the beach could be returned to the beach or spend
some time as a raft and wash up on another beach.
Beach wrack has been characterized as one of the subsidies to sandy beaches, contributing to the “bottom-up” regulation of the community (Dugan et al. 2011). This
could probably be surmised by any observant beach goer who turns over a pile of fairly
fresh giant kelp wrack and sees the grazed blades with a fascinating combination of
terrestrial fly larvae, plus marine amphipods that rapidly burrow into the sand (figure
2.2C). Macrofauna in and around wrack piles can reach extraordinary densities of nearly
100,000 m−2 with a richness of over 60 species that well exceeds that found in areas
without wrack (Yaninek 1980, Dugan et al. 2003). Dugan et al. (2003) found that species richness and the total number of individuals increased as wrack cover increased.
Lavoie (1985) repeatedly sampled cohorts of wrack piles soon after they were stranded as
fresh kelp until they were almost completely degraded at around 36 days. He characterized them as “islands of plenty in a sea of sand” with a succession of macrofaunal consumers starting with amphipods, adult flies, and fly eggs, followed by beetles, fly larvae,
and pseudoscorpions, and ending with another suite of beetles different from those in
mid-succession as well as fly pupae. Litterbag (fresh kelp placed in mesh containers)
experiments deployed over 18 days by Inglis (1989) found a similar early succession in
the first three days followed by an assemblage of meiofauna, fly larvae, and mites. As
found by Lavoie (1985), the wrack was rapidly consumed, with only 36–59% remaining
at the end of the experiments. Lastra et al. (2008) reported the preferential consumption

DETACHED GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

145

of brown algal wrack on beaches near Santa Barbara, California, where the amphipod
Megalorchestia corniculata may eat 55% of palatable giant kelp. Wrack buried for various
lengths of time may exist longer than 36 days (Yaninek 1980), and very little wrack
is consumed if it is transported further inland and dries out (Lavoie 1985). In these
situations, however, dried holdfasts may serve as the nuclei for the formation of embryonic sand dunes (figure 2.2D). Amphipods and other primary consumers of wrack are
eaten by shore birds, fishes that move onto the beach as the tide rises, and terrestrial
animals that forage on the beach. Bradley and Bradley (1993) found that the abundance
of shore birds, especially sanderlings (Calidris alba), black turnstones (Arenaria melanocephala), and black-bellied plovers (Pluvialis squatarola) increased along the Palos Verdes
Peninsula in southern California as the abundance of offshore giant kelp increased, and
Dugan et al. (2003) found that the abundance of plovers was positively correlated with
the abundance of wrack on beaches near Santa Barbara. The relationships between
beach wrack and the abundance of other foragers remain to be investigated.
The rapid colonization and consumption of giant kelp wrack by primary consumers as well as microbial decomposers (ZoBell 1971, Delille and Perret 1991), combined
with further remineralization within the beach sand, recycles considerable quantities of
nutrients that are undoubtedly used by microalgae inhabiting the sand as well as organisms living offshore. Dugan et al. (2011) examined the relationship between nutrients
in beach pore water and wrack biomass on beaches along the mainland near Santa Barbara, California. They estimated an average wrack biomass input of 50 kg dry weight per
year per linear meter of beach. Dissolved inorganic nitrogen concentrations ranged from
1 to over 6000 μmol L −1, with concentrations positively correlated with wrack biomass.
These nutrients may represent significant inputs to offshore communities as tides and
wave action flush nutrients from the permeable beach sands.
Giant kelp beaches, unlike kelp forests, are not universally appreciated, especially
when natural beaches and nearshore ecological processes confl ict with tourist perceptions and recreational desires for beaches without rotting kelp and fl ies, beaches
that from the point of view of the tourism industry are “pristine.” Many beaches are
groomed and raked to remove wrack and produce this distorted notion of what “pristine” is (according to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, pristine is defined as not spoiled,
corrupted, or polluted [as by civilization]). As pointed out by Martin (2008), over 160 km
of beaches are estimated to be groomed in southern California alone. This, no doubt,
subsidizes rubbish dumps rather than beaches, but also affects beach invertebrates and
shore birds. The large-scale disturbance of sand may affect fishes like grunion (Leuresthes tenuis) that lay their eggs in the beach. Perhaps educating beach managers about
the importance of wrack and tourists about interesting beach animals and processes on
naturally pristine beaches will lead to a decline in beach cleaning. After all, who knows
how far ecotourism will go in the future, and if rotting kelp, replete with its aroma, and
its associated communities and ecological connections will be as valued as sunbathing
and marine mammal watching?

146

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

S U B T IDA L S O F T B EN T H O S

Giant kelp detritus that sinks (figure 6.1), whether deposited directly on the bottom or
indirectly after drift plants have spent some time on the shore or as rafts, can be abundant offshore where, as on sandy beaches, it provides food and habitat (review in Krumhansl and Scheibling 2012). Soft bottoms composed of sand, mud, or gravel often border
the lower limit of kelp forests where exported detritus is a primary source of food for animals like the large, tube-dwelling, omnivorous polychaete Diopatra ornata (Kim 1992).
On offshore rocky reefs without macrophytes but near algal stands, red sea urchins
(Strongylocentrotus franciscanus) also depend on algal drift for food (Britton-Simmons et
al. 2009). Giant kelp detritus is increasingly recognized as an important source of food
and habitat in deep water, especially when near kelp forests and concentrated by water
motion and topography. Vetter (1998) and Vetter and Dayton (1999) used a combination of diving, ROVs, and submarines to document the accumulation, distribution, and
use of drift algae in submarine canyons near kelp forests in southern California. They
found “mats” of drift with up to 100% cover of the bottom in depths of 15–65 m at the
head of the Scripps Submarine Canyon. The mats supported an abundant macrofaunal
assemblage with extraordinarily high densities (106 m−2) of small crustaceans (Vetter
1995). These were consumed by a wide variety of fishes that congregated around the
mats, with Merluccius productus (hake) and Pleuronichthys sp. (turbot) being especially
common. The abundance of accumulated drift kelp declined with depth, with <1% cover
below 700 m. Macrofauna are also abundant in the giant kelp and green algal drift that
accumulates at the head of the Monterey Submarine Canyon in central California (Okey
2003). Amphipods and polychaetes dominated detritus at this site. Relative abundances
and species composition were correlated with changes in the age and composition of the
detritus, and the dispersal characteristics and dissolved oxygen tolerance of the fauna.
Drift giant kelp and other macrophytes also provide habitat for species such as the persimmon eelpout, Maynea californica, which was thought to be rare until collected with
detritus in trawls and caught in traps fi lled with surfgrass (Cailliet and Lea 1977). Harrold et al. (1998) also found large accumulations of drift in the Carmel Submarine Canyon in central California, the head of which is surrounded by giant kelp forests. As in the
Scripps Canyon, drift abundance declined with depth. They estimated that Macrocystis
may account for 20–80% of the particulate organic carbon (POC) reaching the canyon
floor at depths between 150 and 450 m. Surveys in southern and central California have
noted a very sparse distribution of detritus on shelves near canyons, which is likely the
result of the lack of concentration mechanisms and increased consumption by the deepsea echinoid S. (= Allocentrotus) fragilis (Harrold et al. 1998, Vetter and Dayton 1999).
Giant kelp can clearly be an important contributor to the secondary productivity of
benthic communities at depths to several hundred meters if kelp forests occur in the
vicinity. Like giant kelp on beaches, however, detrital export to these communities varies
with water motion that causes detachment, and the abundance of detritus is a function

DETACHED GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

147

of transport time and decomposition rate. Transport times have not been determined
but could be rapid, particularly down the axes of submarine canyons (Vetter and Dayton
1999). Decomposition rates have been investigated in experiments using replicate litter
bags retrieved at various time intervals. Albright et al. (1982) placed litterbags with a
1.5 mm mesh and filled with Macrocystis ‘integrifolia’ fronds at 10 m depth on the
bottom of a bay in British Columbia. The fronds degraded to a residue of small particles
in 50–60 days, largely due to decomposition by microbes. Gerard (1976) used 5 mm mesh
bags of M. ‘pyrifera’ placed at 10 m in a Monterey Bay kelp forest and found that 75% of the
biomass was lost in 60 days. Foster and colleagues (unpublished) deployed larger-holed
(50 mm) mesh bags of M. ‘pyrifera’ on the bottom at a depth of 15 m within the Stillwater
Cove kelp forest, at 30 m at the lower edge of the forest, and at 300 m depth offshore.
The biomass at 15 and 30 m declined by 75% in 70–90 days, with more rapid loss at
30 m, while less than 1% of the biomass remained after 40 days at 300 m. Amphipods,
gastropods, and decapods were most abundant in the shallow bags, while annelid worms
dominated at 300 m. Bernardino et al. (2010) placed litter bags of giant kelp on the bottom
at a depth of 1670 m offshore from Santa Barbara, and sampled them using an ROV at
100 and 200 days. Macrofaunal abundances increased within 0.5 m of the bag, but diversity decreased, most likely because of increased sulfide and organic content in the adjacent
sediment. The time to disintegration was not determined, but photos taken at 100 days
indicated that considerable biomass of kelp remained. The investigators argued that while
shorter-lived than a whale carcass or wood falls to the sea floor in deep waters, drift kelp
contributes “stepping stones” for dispersal in the deep sea.
These studies indicate that at depths to 300 m detritus is completely degraded after
around 100 days, and degradation rates may increase with depth in this range but
decline in deeper water. The similar results obtained for different mesh sizes indicate
that degradation is caused primarily by microbial decomposition, with amphipods and
other larger consumers feeding on the partially decomposed and nutritionally enhanced
kelp / microbe mix (review in Krumhansl and Scheibling 2012) rather than on fresh
material. These relatively rapid decomposition rates probably contribute to reduced
detrital abundance on shelves near kelp forests and in canyons below 700 m. Decomposition plus episodic drift generation caused by storms result in drift abundance being
highly variable even in canyons, but with large effects on the diversity, abundances, and
population dynamics of associated species.

K E LP FO R E S T P R O D U C T I V IT Y
GI A N T K EL P

Given the dominance of giant kelp, it is not surprising that Macrocystis has been the
focus of most studies of giant kelp forest productivity. Kelp forests are, however, usually
inhabited by numerous other species of macroalgae, and they are open systems with
transport much affected by water motion. All or parts of macroalgae and sea grasses can

14 8

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

senesce or be dislodged by storms and grazers, and can be transported out of the community or in from other communities. Phytoplankton production also occurs within
kelp forests and biomass produced by plankton outside the kelp forest is transported
into it. Consequently, primary production within a forest is not necessarily a measure of what is available to primary consumers within it. Moreover, primary production
available to consumers can vary from live, attached plants, and suspended plankton to
drift to particulate organic matter (POM) and dissolved organic matter (DOM). This
combination of different sources and forms of production and its use by varied consumers makes unraveling production and energy flow within a forest a formidable and
continuing challenge.
Previous chapters have discussed how several factors contribute to the very high
growth rates of adult giant kelp sporophytes: having a surface canopy in full sunlight,
the ability to translocate the products of photosynthesis, having a high percentage of
photosynthetic versus non-photosynthetic biomass, and often having high nutrients in
coastal waters. High growth rates indicate high productivity. Unfortunately, the size and
complex morphology of giant kelp make measuring productivity difficult. A variety of
methods have been used (Table 6.1), but many of the results are questionable because of
methodological problems and short-term nature of measurements (review in Foster et
al. 2013). The most accurate but most difficult method was pioneered by Gerard (1976),
based on changes in standing crop from measurements of frond density, growth, and
loss. She measured net primary production (NPP), which is gross primary production
minus the production lost in plant respiration. She determined the NPP of giant kelp in
a central California forest to be 2.23 kg dry weight m−2 year−1 (production is integrated
over a m2 column from the surface to the sea floor). Similar methods in kelp forests
along the southern California mainland have yielded similar results (Reed et al. 2008,
Rassweiler et al. 2008; Table 6.1). This method underestimates NPP because it does not
account for production in the form of dissolved organic exudates. These exudates may
be around 20% of NPP at sites around Santa Barbara (D. C. Reed, pers. comm.). Even
without considering DOM, the production of Macrocystis alone ranks giant kelp forests
among the most productive ecosystems on earth (review in Reed and Brzezinski 2009).
In contrast to NPP of giant kelp, the standing crop of Macrocystis (biomass present
at any one time) measured in the studies cited above was relatively low over the area
occupied by kelp forests, averaging only around 0.4 kg dry weight m−2. This seems
low given the visual dominance of giant kelp, but the plant is composed of around
90% water. The productivity / biomass ratio illustrates the dynamic nature of giant kelp
production and loss, with turnover times of 6–7 times per year (Gerard 1976, Reed et
al. 2008). The high NPP of giant kelp therefore results from a relatively small standing
crop that turns over many times per year, which indicates that variation in biomass can
have large effects on production. In a study at three southern California kelp forests over
4.5 years, Reed et al. (2008) developed a measure of “foliar standing crop” (FSC) based
on all plants greater than 1 m tall in several permanent plots. Each plant was measured

DETACHED GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

149

table 6.1

Studies of net primary production (NPP) in giant kelp forests.

Method

Location

Duration of
study

NPP (dry
kg m−2
year−1)

Reference

giant kelp (macrocystis pyrifera unless noted otherwise)
Product of blade standing crop and net
carbon assimilation as measured by in
situ incorporation of 14C by individual kelp
blades during 3 hours of incubations.
Difference between measured dissolved O2
concentration and the concentration
predicted by temperature for midday in
the middle of Pt. Loma kelp forest at
3–6 m depth.
Simulation results from a model of whole
plant growth as a function of
environmental parameters that affect
the flux of light.
Standing crop of harvested plots coupled
with rates of frond initiation and loss.
Product of the density of growing fronds and
the mean monthly increase in frond mass.
Changes in standing crop based on
allometric measurements of fronds
and plants in fi xed plots combined with
independent estimates of biomass loss
from tagged plants and fronds.
Product of leaf area index (LAI) from
M. ‘integrifolia’ harvested from Grappler
kelp forest, and net photosynthetic rates
measured in the laboratory

Monterey,
CA

Multiple
days during
1 month

8.68

Towle and
Pearse (1973)

San Diego,
CA

1 day

12.12

Jackson (1977)

33 N (San
Diego)

NA

1.88

Jackson (1987)

Falkland
Islands
Monterey,
CA
Santa
Barbara,
CA

Spring and
fall of 1 year
Monthly for
21 months
Monthly
for 54 months,
data collection
is ongoing

2.80

van Tussenbroek
(1989)
Gerard (1976)

2.23
2.46

Rassweiler et al.
(2008), Reed
et al. (2008)

British
Bimonthly for
Columbia
12 months

4.33

Wheeler and
Druehl (1986)

Paradise
2 days
Dissolved O2 concentrations in diurnal
Cove, CA
water samples collected in a kelp forest
at discrete depths
Allometric measurements of changes in
Monthly for
Santa
standing crop combined with independent
17 months
Barbara,
estimates of biomass loss for giant kelp.
CA
O2 evolution in enclosed chambers for
intact assemblages of understory algae. C13
incorporation for phytoplankton

6.39

McFarland and
Prescott (1959)

2.73

Miller, R. J. et al.
(2011)

giant kelp forest ecosystem

source: From Foster et al. (2013).
notes: Values of NPP were converted to kg dry weight m−2 year−1 using a wet / dry ratio of 10.31 and a carbon / dry ratio of 0.286 (Rassweiler et al. 2008). NPP estimated in units of oxygen were converted to carbon using a photosynthetic quotient of 1 (following Rosenberg et al. 1995).

in three sections: subsurface fronds that did not reach the sea surface, water column
fronds that did reach the surface, and the portion of fronds in the canopy at the sea
surface. By combining the counts with the water depth above the holdfast and the length
of the fronds in the canopy, they derived the wet mass of each plant and converted this
to dry mass. By revisiting tagged plants and measuring changes in the FSC, they were
able to derive a mean growth rate over time. Integrating this growth rate with FSC over
time, they derived a measure of NPP (detailed methods in Rassweiler et al. 2008). They
found relatively high values of NPP up to 2.4 kg dry weight m−2 year−1 and that FSC
and recruitment collectively accounted for 84% of the variation in annual NPP. Reed et
al. (2009) went on to explore a simpler method for estimating annual NPP and found
that frond density during summer explained 80% of the variation in NPP from year to
year. Reed et al. (2011) argued this relationship was also true for central California given
similarities in frond morphology and seasonal growth, mortality, and recruitment. A
more general understanding of these relationships could greatly simplify productivity
determinations in other regions.
Giant kelp productivity can vary as a result of bottom-up (producer-driven) and
top-down (consumer-driven) processes, and abiotic disturbances such as storms. Topdown effects have been highly publicized and highlighted by Jackson et al. (2001), who
reviewed the literature supporting their belief in the ubiquity of top-down control of
California giant kelp forests. However, given the relationship between productivity and
frond density, productivity can also vary depending on wave disturbance that removes
fronds individually or as entire plants. Reed et al. (2011) tested the relative importance
of these influences by comparing productivity between central and southern California.
Central California experiences large, annual wave disturbances, but low-nutrient conditions are rare. Large sea urchins are also rare, in large part because of sea otter foraging.
In southern California, wave disturbance is much lower, but episodes of low nutrients
are common, sea urchins are more abundant, and sea otters are absent from most of
the region. The top-down and bottom-up hypotheses would both predict that central
California kelp forests should be more productive but for different reasons: more sea
otters, fewer sea urchins, and more nutrients in central California versus few otters,
more sea urchins, and less nutrients in southern California. Reed et al. (2011) rejected
both of these hypotheses. Instead, they found that the annual reduction in frond density
from storms was most important, accounting for a southern California productivity
twice that of central California. As they concluded, their study illustrates “the potential
for physical disturbance to overwhelm the effects of top-down and bottom-up forces in
determining NPP.”
Total production of giant kelp at a particular location most likely varied over geologic
time as changes in sea level and climate caused variation in the distribution and area
of habitat suitable for giant kelp growth. Graham et al. (2010), using bathymetry and
palaeoceanographic information, estimated that giant kelp forest biomass in southern
California has decreased 40–70% relative to its biomass 14,000 years ago.

DETACHED GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

15 1

UN D ER S TO RY A LG A E A ND P H Y TO P L A N K TO N

Understory algae can be abundant within giant kelp forests, but it seems reasonable to
expect that their productivity would be much lower than that of Macrocystis because of
its seemingly high biomass, surface canopy in full sunlight, and consequent shading of
the bottom. This is suggested by Heine’s (1983) in situ measurement of the productivity
of two understory red algae in a central California kelp forest. On a per-gram of tissue
basis, red algal productivity was one-third to one-tenth that of giant kelp. Recent research
by Miller, R. J. et al. (2011) comparing giant kelp, understory algae, and phytoplankton
production in southern California kelp forests with and without giant kelp produced
a surprising result. By removing the giant kelp canopy and maintaining its absence
for around 1.5 years, they found that the combined production of understory algae and
phytoplankton in the absence of giant kelp can, at times, equal that of giant kelp. They
determined giant kelp productivity according to Rassweiler et al. (2008), understory
algal productivity using oxygen production in chambers placed in situ over understory
algal assemblages and sealed to the bottom, and phytoplankton productivity via C13
tracer incubations in light and dark bottles suspended in the kelp forests. Measurements
were made monthly for 17 months. Understory algal productivity increased by 500%
relative to the understory in control plots with giant kelp, and phytoplankton production
increased by 200%. Phytoplankton production increased rapidly following the removal
of giant kelp, but there was a lag in understory production related to a gradual increase in
understory biomass resulting from recruitment and growth in the higher-light environment. Harrer et al. (2013) found that as for giant kelp, annual NPP by understory algae
could be predicted from understory biomass (greatly simplifying production estimates;
details in Miller, R. J. et al. 2011, Harrer et al. 2013), but only in late spring and summer
after opportunistic species colonized and grew. These results are intriguing as they suggest compensatory production if giant kelp is removed. They also beg the questions of
how a relatively constant amount of production but, from different sources, affects the
dynamics of the community, and how these effects compare with those that result from
differences in vertical structure and habitat among the algal taxa.

FO O D W E B S A N D CO NTR O L W E B S

The preceding descriptions of the physical and chemical environment, structure, and
dynamics of giant kelp forest communities highlight the diverse biotic and abiotic environments within which Macrocystis occurs. We define “community structure” as the
composition, abundance, and distribution of species within a community, and “causes
of structure” as processes including productivity, species interactions (e.g., competition
and facilitation), recruitment, disturbances that remove organisms, and substratum
characteristics. Communities are composed of populations of numerous species, so
causes of community structure could hypothetically be understood by linking together

15 2

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

the causes of the demographic features of particular species within the community.
This would require a considerable amount of coordinated research. Other approaches
involve aggregating species into various categories, such as trophic levels, functional
groups, and guilds, looking for patterns within and among categories and the abiotic
environment, building causal models to explain the patterns, and then testing hypotheses derived from the models.
The most common of the aggregation approaches is via food webs. Foods webs have
been of interest since being broadly introduced by Elton (1927) as “food cycles.” Elton
emphasized their utility as a means of illustrating feeding relationships. He pointed out
and considered the causes of patterns in “key-industry animals,” “food niches,” and the
“pyramid of numbers.” As reviewed by Menge (2008), food web studies have expanded
into searches for other patterns, such as food chain lengths, connectance, and trophic
cascades, stimulated by the results of experimental studies of feeding interactions and
interest in the causes and consequences of the diversity and abundance of species at
different trophic levels.
Giant kelp forest food webs have been used as illustrations of feeding relationships
and as grist for the mill of model generation and hypothesis testing. Rosenthal et al.
(1974) produced the first illustration of feeding relationships among the larger species
in the kelp forest at Del Mar in southern California. We have used their web plus others
(e.g., Castilla 1985, Foster and Schiel 1985, Graham et al. 2008) and feeding relationships described at various locations to illustrate a generalized giant kelp forest food web
organized by trophic level and feeding type (figure 6.3), bearing in mind not only that
there is huge variation among the kelp forests of the world, but also that these food webs
are greatly simplified versions of the feeding relationships among the diverse organisms
that can occur in kelp forests (for a more complete web, still under construction, see
http://kelpforest.ucsc.edu/visualize/Network_marker2.html). The food web illustrated
in figure 6.3 is based on feeding observations and gut content analyses. The trophic levels in the web have recently been evaluated in giant kelp forests around Santa Barbara,
California, using δ15N analyses assuming a +3.4‰ increase in δ15N per tropic level, and
estimates of the δ15N producer baseline. The analyses of Page et al. (2013) found feeding relationships similar to those in classic food webs, with the most notable exception
being that many more of the common adult kelp forest fishes (e.g., rockfish, Sebastes
spp.) are secondary consumers that feed on invertebrates rather than on small fishes.
Their results also show a more continuous distribution of δ15N in consumers (figure
6.4), indicating food types are more diverse than implied by the usual trophic partitions
and links in food webs (figure 6.3).
Perhaps the most informative feature of the food web is the importance of detritus.
The detrital pathway has been emphasized by numerous investigators (e.g., Castilla
1985) in many of the kelp forests discussed previously, placing detritus / decomposition with living, attached primary producers, not as in terrestrial forest webs where it
is placed after consumers as a source of nutrients and carbon for below-ground

DETACHED GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

15 3

EXPORT

1° PRODUCERS +
IMPORTED DRIFT
AND PLANKTON

Imported Drift
Macrophytes

Attached Benthic
Macrophytes
Macrocystis
Understory

Detritus

Imported and Resident
Plankton

DOM
POM

Microbes

?

1° CONSUMERS

2° CONSUMERS

3° CONSUMERS

Grazers on Attached Invertebrate
Plants
Detritus Feeders
Gastropods
Gastropods
Sea Urchins
Sea Urchins
Fishes
Polychaetes
Crustaceans
Crustaceans

Invertebrate
Predators
Sea Stars
Gastropods
Octopi
Lobsters

Vertebrate Predators
Fishes including
sharks and rays
Seals and Sea Lions

DECOMPOSERS*

Invertebrate
Suspension Feeders
Bryozoans
Tunicates
Sponges
Polychaetes
Brittle Stars
Bivalves
Cnidarians

Vertebrate Predators
Fishes including
sharks and rays
Birds
Sea Otters

Parasites

Vertebrate Predators
Juvenile and adult
fishes

Scavengers
Sea Stars
Crabs
Lobsters
Gastropods
Anemones

Scavengers
(as for 2°
consumers)

Microbes

figure 6.3
Generalized food web of a giant kelp forest, showing primary producers (top) to tertiary consumers and decomposers (bottom). Arrows indicate the direction of energy flow and double arrows the most likely large flows.
Microbes include bacteria and fungi.
DOM = dissolved organic matter; POM = particulate organic matter; ? = flow uncertain; *(Decomposers) indicates
decomposition also occurs in the detritus pathway.

16
15

3

14
13
12

2

11
10
9

1

8
7

us
at
rn
ca rnia
es o ns
st alif ire s
ba s c ov ide s
Se juli atr ano atu
xy es rr tr
O ast se ros
b es s s
Se ast chu tinu s
b sti s tu
Se ero my ena ca
et es fr ni
H st us for
ba isti ali s
Se chy is c teu
t
ra c n
B yna giga
or r ta
C ste inia icea
sa m d s
Pi ria spa icu
ti a rn ta
Pa rae lifo cula is
yp ca pi ns a
C us ix s eye rnic
on hr r fo
C iot nte ali
c
o
ph m s a
O a u iat us
n
l
e
s
ye la in nt
a
tu
St ab ia m iga
ra
pu
eg ar g
M um ma a pur
uc do at s
C ssa orn rotu
ra a nt
C patr ce .
io lo pp e
D ngy a s lin
ro m se
St opo ba
th er
Li duc
o
Pr
figure 6.4
Nitrogen isotope values of invertebrates and fishes sampled in a kelp forest near Santa Barbara,
California. The producer baseline is 1 (solid line), and position of trophic levels 2 and 3 (dashed lines;
assuming an enrichment factor of +3.4‰) are shown for comparison to values from the animals.
Shading indicates ±1‰ standard deviation for the trophic levels. Standard errors for the animals are
covered by the icons. Note, for example, that most suspension feeders fall within the SD of the mean
for trophic level 2, and most fish are at level 3.
source: From Page et al. (2013).

communities. Gerard (1976) found that 70% of giant kelp production in a central California kelp forest became detritus. Detritus biomass could exceed 20 g dry weight m−2
on the bottom, and over half of it was consumed by benthic herbivores. Consumption by
animals ranging from small crustaceans to sea urchins, abalone, and sea stars is well
documented, as is secondary consumption of these invertebrates by larger invertebrates,
fishes, birds, and mammals (see the “Subtidal Soft Benthos” section; Tutschulte and Connell 1988, Basch and Tegner 2007). Consumption of live giant kelp may actually be rare
in some kelp forests, as Attwood et al. (1991) noted at Marion Island where the only two
abundant grazers, isopods and sea urchins, appeared to consume almost nothing but
detritus. Assessments of within-forest drift algae in the northeast Pacific have shown
it to be highly seasonal. Abundance is high during summer and early autumn when
water motion is reduced, but lower during winter when storm-induced water motion disperses it out of the kelp forest (Gerard 1976, Harrold and Reed 1985, Druehl and Breen
1986, Tutschulte and Connell 1988, Basch and Tegner 2007; see the “Detached Giant
Kelp Communities” section above). With the exceptions of Harrold and Reed’s (1985) and

DETACHED GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

155

Kenner’s (1992) finding that small sea urchins in coralline mats eat more live geniculate
coralline algae when drift is low, and Basch and Tegner’s (2007) observation that sea
urchin reproductive output was positively correlated with drift algal abundance, the direct
consequences of this variation in drift abundance on drift consumers and food web structure have not been determined.
Another feature highlighted by the food web is the inputs or subsidies of production
from adjacent habitats, especially plankton from the surrounding water but also kelp
detritus (Vanderklift and Wernberg 2008): kelp forests are sinks as well as sources.
Numerous suspension feeders (animals that extract POM, live or dead, from the water)
live in kelp forests and can feed on plankton. They may also feed on POM derived
from the senescence of living algae and decomposition of dead giant kelp and other
macroalgae. Early studies based on differences in carbon stable isotope composition
between phytoplankton and kelp suggested that nearly 70% of the fi xed carbon eaten
by suspension feeders in or very near kelp forests came from kelp (review in Miller and
Page 2012). A more comprehensive evaluation by Page et al. (2008), however, comparing reefs with varying amounts of giant kelp found that although large pieces of kelp
detritus were the primary source of food for grazers such as sea urchins, phytoplankton were the primary source for suspension feeders. Yorke et al. (2013) measured the
production of small (<1 cm) detritus particles by giant kelp and coupled these measurements with a 5-year record of giant kelp biomass and POM in a giant kelp forest near
Santa Barbara. They concluded that giant kelp contributed <0.2% of total suspended
POC and particulate organic nitrogen (PON) in the forest. Moreover, Miller and Page
(2012) pointed out that the carbon isotope composition of phytoplankton varies widely
in coastal waters and can be similar to that of kelp. This was not accounted for in many
early studies, leading to overestimates of the importance of kelp POM. Therefore, the
main food of benthic suspension feeders appears to be plankton, and the contribution
of kelp-derived POM remains to be determined. Cross-shelf surveys by Halewood et al.
(2012) found increased amounts of DOM inshore of kelp forests in the Santa Barbara
Channel, suggesting input from macroalgae that are used by heterotrophic bacterioplankton. The fate of the bacterioplankton is unknown (is it eaten, e.g., by sponges and
tunicates?), but there is some suggestion that DOM may be taken up directly by invertebrates (e.g., Fankboner and Druehl 1976). In hindsight, it is not surprising that plankton can be the main source of food for suspension feeders in kelp forests given that the
abundance and diversity of these animals on nearshore reefs with few large brown algae
can be very high, especially in areas where water motion enhances plankton delivery
(e.g., Pequegnat 1964).
Zooplankton are well documented in the diets of kelp forest fishes in California
(e.g., Quast 1971c, Bray 1981). Consumption by fishes can be high enough to affect adult
populations of species like intertidal barnacles whose planktonic larvae pass through
the kelp forest (Gaines and Roughgarden 1987). Interestingly, large zooplankton like
salps (a pelagic tunicate) imported into kelp beds can become food for sea urchins,

15 6

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

reducing their active foraging and indirectly increasing macroalgal recruitment (Duggins 1981). Zooplankton such as opossum shrimp or mysids are produced within the
forest. These omnivores often occur around concentrations of drift algae on which they
forage. They can occur at densities so high that their swarms appear as “clouds” within
a kelp forest, which are consumed by several species of fish (Clarke 1971, Turpen et al.
1994). A final important feature of kelp forest food webs, and perhaps most important
functionally to the maintenance of macroalgal populations, is that many of the common
grazers are “double” generalists, feeding on a wide variety of macroalgal species, both
alive and as detritus.
Of all the possible patterns that might be discerned (real or not; see Peters 1988,
Polis 1991) from food webs, the effects of grazers and predators or “top-down control”
have been the primary pattern of interest, based on some kelp bed and forest sites
where trophic cascades have been shown or suggested to have widespread effects (e.g.,
North and Pearse 1970, Mann and Breen 1972, Estes and Palmisano 1974). In our
assessment, many attempts to investigate these patterns have, for a variety of reasons,
not been rigorous enough to be considered sufficiently informative to derive meaningful relationships. For example, Halpern et al. (2006) concluded that giant kelp forests
show top-down control, based on correlative relationships among species in food webs
constructed from data obtained by others around the Channel Islands in southern
California. The study did not include the influence of variation in ocean climate, misinterpreted some important feeding relationships (e.g., Foster et al. 2006) and did not
consider alternative explanations for the results of their correlative statistical analyses
(e.g., Steele et al. 2006). Halpern et al. (2006) also came up with the rather startling
conclusion that Kellet’s whelk, which feeds on invertebrates on kelp forest floors and is
never particularly abundant, is the key controlling species in kelp forest trophic control.
This conclusion is contrary to just about everything we know about kelp forest ecology, perhaps highlighting the caution that must be exercised in meta-analyses remotely
applied on complex data and relationships. Similar problems, plus a lack of consideration of among-site variation in ocean climate, depth, substratum, and topography, make
questionable Halpern and Cottenie’s (2007) conclusion that there was little evidence
for climate effects on forest structure and dynamics at these sites. Classification of kelp
forest organisms into trophic and other categories labeled functional groups was used
by Micheli and Halpern (2005) to investigate the relationship between species diversity
and functional diversity, again using the Channel Islands data set. Although admitting
that the results are sensitive to the functions chosen and without an operational defi nition of “function” they proceeded. Their functions included feeding types further split
into invertebrates and fishes because of general differences in mobility, which they felt
should be a function. Giant kelp was placed in its own functional group because of its
“unique role” in kelp forests. The result that functional diversity increased with species
diversity is neither surprising nor informative; species are often functionally unique
and their classification arbitrary and highly subjective.

DETACHED GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

15 7

Steinberg et al. (1995) explored the possibility that the number of trophic levels affects
whether or not macroalgal abundance is controlled by top-down effects of predators on
grazers by contrasting North Pacific kelp communities with an odd number of tropic
levels (otters–sea urchins–kelp) to Australasian communities with an even number of
levels (because they had no sea otters). They concluded the theory was correct based
on differences in consumption and phlorotannins (putative chemical defense against
grazing) between regions. An alternative interpretation is that given the opportunity,
high densities of hungry sea urchins will eat lots of algae with or without phlorotannins.
Moreover, macroalgae can do quite well in giant kelp communities where predators
appear to have little effect on grazers (e.g., Castilla 1985), and Estes et al. (1998) suggest
that at least in parts of the North Pacific killer whales eat sea otters, giving the food web
an even number of trophic levels. In any case, the simplification of kelp forest systems
to “odd and even” trophic levels has several pitfalls and caveats, not least of which are
the facts that other predators can exert strong trophic linkages on adult urchins at some
austral sites (e.g., Johnson et al. 2011), kelp species and their diversity are greatly different in the northern and southern hemispheres, and site-specific trophic control by
benthic-feeding fishes on juvenile sea urchins (e.g., Andrew and Choat 1982) can influence kelp forest dynamics.
Others have used field correlations and laboratory experiments to determine the
effects of interaction strengths and predator diversity. Byrnes et al. (2006) used these
to investigate the effects of predator diversity on trophic cascades. They found positive
correlations between predator diversity and kelp abundance in the data set used by
Halpern and colleagues above. They tested if these were causal via effects on herbivores
by placing varying numbers of different predators in laboratory tanks with a suite of
herbivores plus giant kelp fronds, and determining how much kelp was consumed. In
a similar experiment, Sala and Graham (2002) determined grazer–plant interaction
strengths because they might help test the theory that weak interactions increase community stability and resistance to invasion. They determined the interaction strengths
of eight grazers by placing each into separate containers with monocultures of microscopic giant kelp sporophytes and then measuring consumption. These experiments
and those of Byrnes et al. could be useful conceptually, but their relevance to natural
communities is unknown, not the least because grazers (and predators) have numerous food choices in the field, do not graze in isolation from other animals, and are not
naturally confined in small spaces with few choices. Again, a cautionary note is warranted. As Connell (1974) pointed out in his argument for using field experiments in
ecological research, there is every reason to believe organisms in laboratory experiments
will not behave naturally. Sala and Dayton (2011) assessed grazer–giant kelp interaction
strengths in laboratory experiments similar to those of Sala and Graham (2002), and
then examined the relevance of these to the field by using a long-term data set from field
sampling of grazer densities and kelp recruitment in the Point Loma kelp forest near
San Diego, California. Grazer densities that eliminated sporophyte recruitment in the

15 8

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

laboratory could eliminate recruitment in the field, but not always. As Sala and Dayton
(2011) pointed out, the ecological significance of per capita interaction strengths would
be expected only under specific assumptions and conditions, in their case including
when giant kelp is removed by storms or some other abiotic phenomenon over a large
area and recruitment after removal comes from a single new cohort. Ecological significance also depended on the behavior of sea urchins, the distribution of giant kelp, and
whether recruits managed to reach a size refuge from particular grazers.
A larger-scale approach was used by Byrnes et al. (2011) to understand kelp forest
dynamics using food webs as part of a model. They combined a long-term data set
on the abundance of organisms from coastal forests near Santa Barbara, well-vetted
feeding relationships, and satellite imagery to assess kelp canopy dynamics, and sitespecific wave data to examine the effects of storms on food web structure using structural equation modeling (SEM). Moreover, since the main direct effect of storms is to
remove giant kelp, they evaluated the model with a multiyear field experiment at four
sites where Macrocystis was removed from one of two paired 2000 m−2 plots. They
concluded that a single severe storm helped maintain the complexity of kelp forest food
webs, primarily by altering light that affects competitive interactions between sessile
invertebrates and understory algae (Arkema et al. 2009). An increase in storm frequency, however, reduced food web diversity and complexity due to local species loss,
particularly among higher trophic levels. The results beg the question: how much of the
change in food webs resulted from changes in feeding relationships versus structural
alterations that can affect species presence and abundance? After all, the loss of giant
kelp during storms removes most of the three-dimensional structure of the kelp forest
and therefore much of its biogenic habitat. Therefore, how much of the change is due
to the consequences of altering the food web, such as through reduced sessile invertebrate abundance resulting in the reduction of predators that feed on them, compared
to how much is due to the direct effects of the disturbance itself, such as fewer sessile
invertebrate predators due to loss of habitat, or some combination of many factors? Such
questions cannot be investigated with current models, but perhaps future modeling will
become more realistic by incorporating the relative importance of these alternatives.
Some hint of the answers might be found in a discussion of species that changed and
when they did so, but, unfortunately, such natural history information is usually lacking
in modeling papers.
We concur with Menge (2008) that the trend toward understanding the causes of
community structure by incorporating the direct and indirect effects of competitive and
facilitative interactions, of inputs of food and larvae from surrounding communities,
attributes of the substratum, and disturbances caused by variation in the chemical and
physical environment is refreshing. Figure 6.5 is an attempt to cast these interactions
and processes in a “control web” for a giant kelp forest, a web of factors and interactions
that can control or have large effects on populations with the community. Such a web deemphasizes the assumed primacy of feeding relationships inherent in food webs, and

DETACHED GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

159

X

Y

Affects Distribution and
Abundance of

Abiotic Environment
Dispersal, Recruitment, Disease
(ADRD)

Plankton

Predation on Spores
and Gametes
Abrasion
Food*

BENTHIC
MACROPHYTES
Competition
Light, Space

Facilitation
Habitat

Detritus
Grazing

Competition
Space
ADRD

DETRITUS AND
SUSPENSION
FEEDERS
Predation on
Larvae

Competition
Space
Food

Predation on Larvae

Predation
on Adults
and Larvae

GRAZERS

ADRD

Competition
Food
Facilitation
Habitat
Predation
on Adults
and Larvae

Predation on
Larvae

PREDATORS

ADRD

Competition
Food
Predation

figure 6.5
Generalized control web of factors and interactions affecting the distribution and abundance of
organisms within a giant kelp forest. Arrows indicate the direction of effects; those that circle back
indicate interactions within groups. ADRD refers to abiotic environment, dispersal, recruitment and
disease. * indicates food reduced by flow reduction and interference of fronds. Note that as in figure
6.3, this web includes feeding relationships (predation and grazing) but also recognizes numerous
other important factors and interactions.

recognizes the variety of factors and their interactions that have been identified from
natural history observations and community descriptions, experiments, and observations and are known to affect kelp forests. Reed et al. (2011) exemplify this approach,
and if food webs are useful in this regard, then Byrnes et al. (2011) is a step in the right
direction. However, we think a control web that incorporates this variety is the conceptual model that better approximates relationships and processes that can affect the
composition of giant kelp forests, and emphasizes that hypotheses based on a particular

16 0

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

relationship or process need to be tested relative to alternatives. Perhaps this web can
eventually be modeled, eliminating the need for food web-based modeling.

It seems to us that there has been somewhat of a disconnection between some efforts to
model kelp forest community dynamics or sort out important interactions via elaborate
and often opaque correlation analyses, and the hard-won observational and experimental research that has gone on for over 70 years. This disconnection can be both practical
and philosophical. The practical side is that many known relationships and interactions
can be subsumed as averages or noise in models, leading to nonsensical conclusions (at
least to an empirical ecologist). The philosophical differences may lie in how empiricists
and modelers or theoreticians view the world. Are there truly nontrivial, underlying
relationships that can be discerned across systems, forest types, biogeographic zones,
and the myriad species that inhabit them? Or are we forever to work out the intricacies
of nature on a case-by-case and site-by-site basis, perhaps like the “stamp collecting”
referred to in the early 20th century by Earnest Rutherford (in Birks 1962; “All science is either physics or stamp collecting”; see also Todd 2012) These issues have been
debated for some time (e.g., Lawton 1999, Simberloff 2004), but their resolution is still
in the future. A better understanding of the relative effects of variation in production
and structure on the community is needed. In our opinion, food web-based models
have so far made only marginal contributions to understanding giant kelp communities in nature. We look forward to more realistic modeling approaches that incorporate
important processes in addition to feeding relationships that are well anchored by field
observations and experiments.

DETACHED GIANT KELP COMMUNITIES

•

161

This page intentionally left blank

7
FACILITATIVE AND
COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS
IN GIANT KELP FORESTS
The dynamics of this system are driven by variability in the abundance of a
single structure-forming species (Macrocystis) that has indirect positive, as
well as direct negative, effects on associated species.
—Arkema et al. (2009)

Of the myriad interactions that occur in giant kelp forests, most emphasis has been on
processes that remove kelp through trophic relationships. Relatively few studies have
explored the ways in which nonconsumptive interactions affect overall forest composition and the array of patches encountered within a kelp forest. These interactions can
be facilitative or competitive. To many, these direct and indirect interactions are made
possible by higher-order trophic dynamics, such as reduced grazing by sea urchins
because top predators such as sea otters are present. To others, these interactions are key
relationships involving fundamental processes of settlement, recruitment dynamics,
light adaptations, food provision, and habitat use, which together provide the biogenic
requirements supporting the vast array of species within kelp communities. In this
chapter, we review what is known about facilitative and competitive interactions and
their importance relative to other interactions in structuring giant kelp communities.

FACILITATI ON

Broadly defined, facilitation denotes positive interactions between species where at least
one species benefits and no harm is done to the other. The subcategory of mutualism
refers to interactions where both species benefit (review in Bruno et al. 2003). The clearest examples of facilitation in giant kelp forests are the numerous invertebrates that use
the fronds and holdfasts of giant kelp as a place to live, a refuge from predators, and
perhaps an enhanced food supply in the form of plankton and the small epiphytes on

16 3

fronds or detritus in holdfasts (e.g., Ghelardi 1971, Coyer 1984; see Chapter 5, Within
Communities: Habitats and Patches). Similar facilitation is provided by dense mats of
coralline algae (Dearn 1987, Kenner 1992). Not all habitat effects are facilitative, however. Some crustaceans (e.g., Cerda et al. 2009) and gastropods (Watanabe 1984b) graze
on giant kelp fronds, sea urchins (Kenner 1992, Tegner et al. 1995—“Sea urchin cavitation”) and isopods (Barrales and Lobban 1975) graze on holdfasts and coralline fronds,
and encrusting bryozoans may contribute to blade loss (Dixon et al. 1981). Macrocystis
can also facilitate fishes that use it as recruitment habitat, as a refuge from predators,
and that feed on plankton or associated invertebrates (Quast 1971b, 1971c, DeMartini
and Roberts 1990). The relationships with fishes can be mutualistic. Bernstein and
Jung (1979) found that the señorita Oxyjulis californica reduced grazing as well as
frond sinking by preying on crustaceans and bivalves. Field experiments by Davenport
and Anderson (2007) that excluded fishes from stands of juvenile and adult giant kelp
showed that in the absence of predators, grazing invertebrates increased, thereby reducing the number of kelp fronds and frond growth rates (figure 7.1). Predation by O. californica and the kelp perch Brachyistius frenatus had especially large effects. These authors
argue that the indirect, facilitative effect of fish predation on mesograzers that eat giant
kelp may be one of the most important interactions in giant kelp forests. The positive
effects of predation by fishes, however, may become negative if in the pursuit of their
prey the fishes remove giant kelp tissue (Bernstein and Jung 1979, Dixon et al. 1981).
Giant kelp may also enhance recruitment of juvenile fishes through the provision
of recruitment and nursery areas. This has been shown for various rockfishes (Sebastes
spp.) in central California (Carr 1991), and kelp bass (Paralabrax clathratus), kelp surfperch, the giant kelp fish (Heterostichus rostratus), and señorita in southern California
(Carr 1989, 1994, O’Connor and Anderson 2010). Facilitative interactions are therefore
clear for some giant kelp associates but not for others. Facilitation can also be complex,
indirect, and even circular, such as giant kelp facilitating fishes, which eat grazers,
thereby facilitating kelp. Many, and probably most, of these relationships are not obligate. Invertebrates and fish associated with giant kelp can recruit elsewhere within the
forest, especially in areas with high-relief substrata. It is important to remember that
interactions described in California may not hold in other areas that have very different
fish and invertebrate faunas (see Chapter 5). On a geographic scale, however, the communities described in Chapter 5 allow the probability of most of these types of interactions, although the intensity and magnitude of most of them are yet to be explored.
Although not strictly an “interaction,” the role of microhabitats in kelp recruitment
dynamics is probably important. These small habitats can provide a refuge from grazing for the early life history stages of kelps. One somewhat bizarre relationship was
observed by Garbary et al. (1999) of kelp gametophytes occurring endophytically in various filamentous and foliose red algae. It could be expected that facilitation is important
to the recruitment of Macrocystis because spores arrive in numerous microhabitats and
microscopic stages may be particularly vulnerable to grazing. Under suitable conditions

16 4

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

Total invertebrate biomass
per blade area (mg/100 cm²)

Cage removal
100

A

a

50
25
15
10

b
b

5

Mesograzer biomass per
blade area (mg/100 cm²)

Cage removal
100
50
25

a

15
10

b

5

b

10

Hole area per blade area
(%)

B

C

8

Fish exclusion
Fish access
Cage control
Habitat reef

a

6
4
2

b
b

0
24 Jul

8 Aug

20 Aug

6 Sep

15 Sep

figure 7.1
The effects of fish inclusion and exclusion on small grazing invertebrates and
kelp fronds, from an experiment at Santa Catalina Island, southern California. (A) Total invertebrate biomass per blade; (B) mesograzer biomass per
blade; and (C) the percentage of hole area (i.e., grazed through) per area of
blade for three treatments (±1 standard error). Treatments were fish exclusion,
fish access, and cage control, plus open reef areas near experiments, which
were done over 45 days. Treatments with the same lowercase letter are not
significantly different from each other. Note the log scale in panels A and B.
source: From Davenport and Anderson (2007).

of light, nutrients, temperature, and lack of sedimentation, however, giant kelp can
recruit to a wide variety of natural substrata (Reed and Foster 1984) as well as concrete
blocks (Foster 1975b) and boulders (Reed et al. 2004). Although not precluding a role of
microsites in spore and germling survival, this does suggest that at the scale of whole
forests, facilitation may not be very important to giant kelp recruitment, growth, and
survivorship.
Evidence from clearing experiments indicates that nongeniculate corallines and the
crustose holdfasts of geniculate corallines may enhance recruitment relative to bare rock
(Reed and Foster 1984). Whether the enhancement was due to facilitation or the prior
occupation of corallines by microscopic stages of giant kelp was not determined. Other
experiments have shown that corallines do facilitate the recruitment of the large, foliose
brown alga Desmarestia ligulata, an annual understory species that opportunistically
recruits when giant kelp canopies are reduced (Edwards 1998). In contrast, Okamoto et
al. (2013) showed that fleshy red and brown algal crusts can inhibit kelp recruitment but
not enough to significantly reduce adult densities relative to those in natural stands, and
Breitburg (1984) found nonsignificant effects of nongeniculate corallines on macroalgal
recruitment but significant negative effects on sessile invertebrate. It appears, therefore,
that crustose algae can affect algal and sessile invertebrate recruitment, but it is not
always clear if the effects are ecologically important. Future studies that include better
identification of crusts and the organisms that might settle on them are needed; the
“recruitment function” of crusts most likely varies among crusts and potential recruits.
In southern Chile, the slipper limpet Crepipatella fecunda can facilitate annual
populations of giant kelp by enhancing recruitment success, possibly by removing the
propagules of potential algal competitors (Henríquez et al. 2011). Harris et al. (1984)
described an interesting facilitation of Macrocystis by algal turfs. They found enhanced
recruitment of Macrocystis on Naples Reef (near Santa Barbara, California) within dense
red and brown algal turfs that provided a refuge for juvenile sporophytes from grazing
by herbivorous fishes. This facilitation may be unique as it occurred after a storm that
removed most large algae from the study reef, thereby concentrating grazing by resident
fish on small benthic plants.
Numerous other organisms besides kelp have facilitative relationships in a kelp forest. Nongeniculate coralline algae and noncalcified red algal crusts and turfs have been
demonstrated to facilitate the recruitment of abalone and sea urchins. Abalone can
preferentially settle and metamorphose on nongeniculate coralline algae and noncalcified red algal crusts in response to the presence of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the
surface cells of the thalli (Morse et al. 1979). The response can vary depending on the
species of abalone and algae (Daume et al. 1999a), and settlement may also occur in
response to diatom and bacterial films (Daume et al. 1999b). Rowley (1989) found that
newly settled larvae of the sea urchins Strongylocentrotus franciscanus and S. purpuratus
were most abundant on nongeniculate coralline algae and foliose red algal turfs, and S.
purpuratus larvae preferentially settled on these substrata in the laboratory. These rela-

16 6

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

tionships could be mutualistic because newly settled abalone (and probably sea urchins)
feed primarily on diatom films and bacteria (review and data in Garland et al. 1985) that
can potentially inhibit algal growth.
An associational interaction, another type of facilitation that occurs when consumption of one species is reduced by neighboring species, was delineated with field experiments by Levenbach (2009) in California kelp forests. The interaction is among the
strawberry anemone Corynactis californica, algal turfs, and sea urchins. Levenbach
found that algal turfs could be protected from sea urchin grazing by the strawberry
anemone C. californica, but that this varied with grazing intensity. When urchin grazing
was reduced, the anemone and algae compete for space, but when grazing was moderate
the anemone facilitated algae nearby by inhibiting sea urchin foraging. When grazing
was intense, inhibition by the anemone was insufficient to prevent grazing, so the turfs
were consumed.

CO MP E TITI O N

Competition, a negative interaction, occurs within and between species when individuals require the same resource that is insufficient for all and therefore compromises
some combination of growth, reproduction, and survival. Without some other process
such as storm disturbance that constrains populations below the point where a resource
is limiting, the likely critical resources in giant kelp forests are light, space, and food.
Anyone who has dived beneath a thick surface canopy of giant kelp has experienced
the drastic reduction in light that occurs (figure 7.2). Early investigators noted this, as
well as a reduction in understory algae beneath thick canopies (e.g., Neushul 1971b),
suggesting giant kelp outcompetes understory species for light. This is further indicated by a comparison of some sites at Catalina Island where understory kelps are abundant on the benthos above and below the margins of giant kelp distribution, but not
under giant kelp (see Chapter 5), and by shallow offshore banks in the same region
where, in the absence of giant kelp (most likely due to high water motion), understory
kelps are abundant at depths where giant kelp usually grows (Lewbel et al. 1981, Lissner
and Dorsey 1986).
Various canopies can act alone or in concert to alter the light environment on the
benthos so light measurements are critical to unraveling responses to canopy removals.
Neushul (1971b) measured the light reduction caused by giant kelp canopies using a
custom-made, self-contained diver’s photometer and found, as have subsequent investigators with more sophisticated instruments, that light attenuation by the water alone
may reduce bottom light (at 20 m depth) to around 5–10% of light at the surface. The
addition of a surface canopy of giant kelp and fronds in the water column can reduce
this to 0.5–1%, which is at or below the limits for the growth of kelps (see Chapter 3).
Within kelp forest patches, the array of species may be partially dictated by intraspecific competition within kelp species. For example, Reed (1990b) experimentally thinned

FACILITATIVE AND COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS

•

167

figure 7.2
Canopy effects on light and understory. Left: light reduction looking up under a giant kelp canopy.
Right: understory beneath a dense canopy of Pterygophora californica in Stillwater Cover, California.
The benthos is dominated by nongeniculate corallines, sponges, and bryozoans. Sea stars are Patiria
miniata (around 15 cm dia.). The sea star on the P. californica is probably digesting bryozoans growing
on the stipe.
source: Photos by M. S. Foster.

populations of the understory kelp Pterygophora californica to 2, 58, and 102 plants per
m2. Recruits of Pterygophora and other macroalgae, as well as epiphytes on the kelp
plants, appeared only in the low-density stands. Furthermore, the grazers Lytechinus pictus (=anamesus) and Aplysia californica were common only at low Pterygophora density.
On a per capita basis, individuals at high density had lower growth and less reproductive
output than those at low density, probably a consequence of light competition. Reed and
others (e.g., Schiel and Choat 1980, Schiel 1985, Stewart et al. 2009) argue that species’
architecture, wave climate, and the depth at which they occur can affect the degree of
dominance and suppression of stand density, both within and between species.
The negative relationship between giant kelp abundance and understory canopy cover
or plant density has been documented by correlative studies using giant kelp surface
canopy cover (Foster 1982) or stipe and adult densities (Carr 1989, Tegner et al. 1997)
as a proxy for light reduction, and field experiments that removed giant kelp. Pearse
and Hines (1979) did the first such experiment using the kelp forest at Point Santa
Cruz, California. They removed all giant kelp from a 10 × 20 m plot at 8 m depth and
followed changes in the understory vegetation relative to a nearby control at the same
depth. The removal resulted in an increase in light to the benthos from 0.2% to 4%
of surface irradiance. Juvenile kelps and foliose red algae increased rapidly, exceeding
abundances in the control plot within 3 months. In another much-cited study, Reed and
Foster (1984) examined the effects of multiple canopies at 15 m depth in the kelp forest

16 8

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

Kelp canopy
control

Kelp canopy
removal

Macrocystis pyrifera
coralline control
Pterygophora californica
scrape to bare rock

coralline branches
removed

figure 7.3
Schematic of a removal experiment testing the direct and interacting effects of various
canopy layers and benthic cover on algal recruitment in Stillwater Cover, central California. The experiment involved having plus and minus canopies of the kelps Macrocystis
pyrifera and P. californica, the lower canopy formed by branches of geniculate corallines,
and benthic cover of coralline crusts. Large quadrats were 1 m2.
source: From Reed and Foster (1984).

at Stillwater Cove, California, over a 2-year period by removing various combinations of
giant kelp, dense stands of the understory kelp P. californica, a bottom canopy composed
primarily of the geniculate coralline Calliarthron tuberculosum, and a crustose layer of
nongeniculate corallines and geniculate coralline holdfasts (figure 7.3). Removal of the
dense Macrocystis canopy alone resulted in increased kelp recruitment and increased
abundances of other understory brown (especially Desmarestia ligulata) and red algae,
but only if P. californica was also removed; P. californica alone was capable of reducing
light to below 1% of surface irradiance and suppressing recruitment. Recruitment was
further enhanced by the removal of C. tuberculosum and coralline crusts but only in
areas were kelp canopies were also removed. Recruitment was also greater on crusts
than on areas scraped to bare rock, perhaps because of microscopic stages remaining on the crusts. These experiments, like those of Dayton et al. (1984), showed that
all canopies except the crustose layer can inhibit recruitment and that competition for
light, as it affects recruitment, increases as the number of canopy levels increase. The
strength of this competition most likely varies with the density of the canopies and

FACILITATIVE AND COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS

•

16 9

with depth, as suggested by the reduced growth and reproduction of the understory
fucoid Stephanocystis (=Cystoseira) osmundacea as depth increased within kelp forests in
central California (Schiel 1985).
An interesting contrast is that although large increases in foliose red algae occurred
after the removal of giant kelp by Pearse and Hines (1979), the kelp removals by Reed
and Foster (1984) resulted in only very small increases in red algae. Clark et al. (2004)
examined the red algal response to canopy removals in more detail in Stillwater Cove,
including the effects of removing the thick bottom canopy of the foliose brown alga D.
ligulata that develops when kelp canopies are removed. After kelp canopy removal, the
seasonal D. ligulata canopy alone reduced light to <1% of surface levels. Foliose red algae
as a group did not increase significantly until 2 years after the clearings were initiated.
Nine common species of foliose red algae occur in the cove, and further analyses indicated that these responded differently in space and time. Some species (“light-flexible”;
e.g., Plocamium cartilagineum) changed little in response to canopy removals, while
others (“light-adapted”; e.g., Fauchea laciniata) increased within a year in the canopy
removal treatments. These groups could be further subdivided into high- and intermediate-light species depending on their response to the removal of one or more canopies.
The difference in red algal responses between Point Santa Cruz and Stillwater Cove is
probably due, therefore, to differences in understory species composition. Point Santa
Cruz was and remains dominated by very thin-bladed, foliose red algae such as Cryptopleura violacea and Polyneura latissima (Breda and Foster 1985) that grow rapidly in
response to the increased light.
These results of canopy removals are in contrast to those at Puerto Toro, Chile, by
Santelices and Ojeda (1984b) (see figure 5.3B), who removed the upper 1 m of the giant
kelp canopy in a 5 × 50 m transect perpendicular to shore, and compared the result to an
unmanipulated transect. Macrocystis recruitment increased in the removal transect, but
the understory kelp Lessonia flavicans decreased in biomass and fleshy red algal biomass
remained similar to the control. The authors argued that these effects of the Macrocystis
canopy were much less than those found in North American giant kelp forests, and
questioned the designation of giant kelp as a foundation species. However, the provision
of habitat and other effects of giant kelp qualify it as a foundation species, and the different effects of canopy removal at Puerto Toro may well be due to the way giant kelp was
manipulated; only the canopy was removed at Puerto Toro leaving fronds in the water
column, whereas entire plants were removed in the California experiments discussed
above. Other studies involving the removal of only part of the surface canopy of giant
kelp yielded similar responses. For example, where the surface canopy was removed by
a kelp-harvesting ship and effects compared to nonharvested areas in central California,
Kimura and Foster (1984) also found the small changes similar to those in the Puerto
Toro experiment. Moreover, Reed and Foster (1984) and Clark et al. (2004) showed that
dense understory kelp canopies can have the same effect as giant kelp. The response to
the giant kelp removal of Pearse and Hines (1979) may have reflected the sparse canopy

17 0

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

of understory kelps at their sites. The results of Santelices and Ojeda (1984b), therefore,
may have been a consequence of the remaining shade produced by giant kelp fronds in
the water column plus shade produced by a dense canopy of L. flavicans. The different
results are difficult to reconcile without appropriate light measurements and may also
be related to differences in understory composition in the different areas, as between
Point Santa Cruz and Stillwater Cove.
It is tempting to infer from Macrocystis canopy removals that species living below the
lower limit of giant kelp are prevented from moving into the forest due to competition
for light. This has rarely been tested, but for at least one species, the elk kelp, Pelagophycus porra (figure 1.1), it is not the case. This large, float-bearing kelp commonly occurs
outside the deeper edge of giant kelp forests from San Diego into Baja California. Using
a combination of field transplants, light measurements, and lab experiments, Fejtek et
al. (2011) found that elk kelp does not usually occur in giant kelp forests because their
sporophytes take nearly 100 days to develop from spores to macroscopic size, and these
microscopic stages are intolerant of high light. Giant kelp canopies can reduce benthic
light to levels suitable for the small stages, but Fejtek et al. argued that canopies often
vary over 100 days, so it is likely there will be one or more high-light events sufficient to
kill the microscopic stages. Therefore, elk kelp is not excluded by competition for light,
but does not occur in giant kelp forests or shallower water because it cannot tolerate
the high-light conditions there, even if these conditions occur only occasionally. The
study by Fejtek et al. (2011) shows well that a full understanding of the distribution and
abundance of a kelp species requires understanding the ecology of all life history stages,
as we have argued previously (e.g., Schiel and Foster 2006).
Given that giant kelp can suppress understory development, how does the understory
persist? Most likely this is because giant kelp canopies vary in extent and thickness,
which affects the light environment below. These differences are largely due to storms
(Arkema et al. 2009). For example, the giant kelp canopy in Stillwater Cove is greatly
reduced during winter storms, with a burst of understory growth in the following spring
before the canopy recovers (Reed and Foster 1984). Giant kelp canopies are more persistent within more protected sites in Monterey Bay and, interestingly, the understory
kelp P. californica does not occur at these sites (Harrold et al. 1988). As suggested by
the effects of shading by giant kelp on the physiology of P. californica (Watanabe et al.
1992), and in contrast to the study of Fejtek et al. (2011) above, perhaps this kelp is absent
because there is not enough light at some time during the year to sustain populations.
Competition also occurs among the microscopic stages of giant kelp and probably
between these and other small seaweeds and invertebrates, but is not well understood
given the difficulties of field investigations. As Reed (1990a) pointed out, there is
undoubtedly competition-based density-dependent mortality among developing Macrocystis and other kelp sporophytes given that successful reproduction requires spore
settlement densities of over 1 mm−2, but the size and spacing of adult sporophytes are
orders of magnitude larger. There may also be competition among gametophytes of

FACILITATIVE AND COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS

•

17 1

different kelp species. Because all female kelp gametophytes produce the same pheromone, lamoxirene, that causes release and attraction of sperm to eggs, Müller (1981) (see
Chapter 2) suggested “chemical warfare” may occur among gametophytes of different
species if they co-occur. The species producing mature female gametophytes (and thus
the pheromone) first could cause premature sperm release and consequent reduced
fertilization in other species. This form of interference competition was suggested in
experiments by Reed (1990a), but its importance relative to other causes of differences
in the relative abundance of kelps in mixed stands in the field is unknown.
The competitive effects of giant kelp on understory seaweeds have indirect effects
on sessile animals. Various small-scale studies have suggested understory algae and
sessile invertebrates compete for space in kelp communities and the competition is
often mediated by light. Low light favors sessile invertebrates that can overgrow algae
(Breda and Foster 1985) or possibly inhibit their recruitment, while high light favors
algae that can negatively affect sessile invertebrates by increasing sediment loadings
(Duggins et al. 1990) and by overgrowing, abrading, and inhibiting their recruitment
(review in Arkema et al. 2009). These interactions may vary with life history stage.
For example, Breitburg (1984) found that nongeniculate coralline algae outcompete
various sessile invertebrates for space by inhibiting larval settlement, but as adults the
invertebrates can outcompete algae by growing over them. Predators can enhance algal
abundance in low light by removing invertebrates (e.g., Foster 1972, Foster 1975b), and
grazers can enhance invertebrate abundance in high light by removing algae that can
reduce invertebrate abundance via abrasion (e.g., Coyer et al. 1993). In a rigorous and
thorough study, Arkema et al. (2009) examined the relationship between giant kelp
shading and the abundances of understory algae and sessile invertebrates in southern California using a combination of removal experiments and multisite surveys over
8 years, and structural equation modeling (SEM) to evaluate direct and indirect interactions. Removal of giant kelp resulted in an increase in light from 0.7% to 1.7% of surface
levels, and quite large increases of 15–60% cover of understory algae in areas where
invertebrates were also removed. Multisite surveys showed that giant kelp abundance
was negatively correlated with understory cover but positively correlated with sessile
invertebrate cover. Overall, however, the indirect effect of giant kelp on sessile invertebrates was six times greater than the direct effect (figure 7.4). Arkema et al. (2009)
argued that coexistence of understory algae and sessile invertebrates occurs because
of variation in giant kelp abundance, primarily due to storms, that causes variation in
the light effect. The responses of benthic organisms occurred in less than a year, such
that neither understory algae nor sessile invertebrates could dominate for long periods.
They concluded that the main driver of community dynamics is giant kelp abundance
(see introductory quote to this chapter). Like the direct competitive effects of kelp canopies discussed previously, it appears that the relative abundances of sessile species in
habitats with potentially high light are greatly affected by the direct and indirect effects
of kelp canopy dynamics. The abundance of plankton at particular sites may also affect

17 2

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

Giant kelp
frond density
—0.39

0.09

—0.05

Mid-canopy
kelps
0.04

Understory
algae

0.19

—0.74

Sessile
invertebrates

0.08

0.15
Giant kelp
holdfast percent cover

figure 7.4
Fitted competition and facilitation
model to estimate the strength of
direct and indirect effects of giant
kelp frond density, a surrogate
for light reduction. Numbers
are path coefficients indicating
the magnitude of the interaction
and whether it is negative (−) or
positive (+). Solid lines indicate
significant paths (p < 0.05). The
magnitude of the indirect effect of
giant kelp (via understory algae)
on sessile invertebrates (−0.39 ×
−0.74 = 0.29) is nearly six times
greater than the direct effect
(−0.05).
source: From Arkema et al. (2009).

the outcome of interactions related to light and space because food availability, like light
for algae, may alter the ability of sessile invertebrates to overgrow algae (see figure 6.5).
Competition for light between giant kelp and understory algae can also have indirect effects on fishes that feed on invertebrates in the understory. Schmitt and Holbrook (1990) found that the abundance of “turf” (small algae, sessile invertebrates
and debris) was positively correlated with the abundance of giant kelp at Santa Cruz
Island, southern California, and that the abundance of foliose algae (especially the red
alga Gelidium robustum) was negatively correlated with giant kelp. These differences
in understory composition affected the abundances of two species of surfperch. Black
surfperch (Embiotoca jacksoni) forages for crustaceans associated with turf, and striped
surfperch (E. lateralis) forages for similar food associated with foliose algae. The relative
abundances of these surfperches may also be affected by direct competition between
them (Hixon 1980), as are the abundances of some species of rockfishes along depth
gradients in California (Larson 1980). These and other examples of competitive interactions in the diverse fish fauna of California giant kelp forests are discussed in detail by
Hixon (2006).
The relationships discussed above show that understory algae can be key species
in kelp forest dynamics. They can be greatly affected by competition for light with
giant kelp and can also compete with each other, most likely for light. Perhaps the

FACILITATIVE AND COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS

•

17 3

best examples of this are the interactions among the kelp Eisenia arborea, the fucoid
Stephanocystis (= Halidrys) dioica, and the foliose red alga Pterocladiella (=Pterocladia)
capillacea elucidated with field experiments by Kastendiek (1982) at Catalina Island,
California. He found that canopy of E. arborea acts as a refuge for P. capillacea by excluding S. dioica. When the kelp canopy was removed, S. dioica spread adventitiously into the
removal area, excluding P. capillacea and covering all space on the bottom. The effect
of kelp canopy removal on P. capillacea was not physiological because P. capillacea persisted after canopy removal if S. dioica was experimentally prevented from entering the
canopy removal area. These sorts of effects can also influence the success of introduced
species, as demonstrated in Tasmania by Valentine and Johnson (2003) and Edgar et al.
(2004), and in New Zealand by Schiel and Thompson (2012) who showed that the distribution of the introduced kelp Undaria pinnatifida was inhibited by native algal canopies.
Perhaps surprisingly, understory canopies can also affect their own abundances as well
as that of associated species by inhibiting invasion by grazers that react negatively to
fronds that sweep over and touch them (Velimirov and Griffiths 1979, Konar 2000).
This effect has been reproduced using plastic strips to inhibit sea urchin grazing on
transplanted giant kelp (see Chapter 11).
Few studies have examined competitive effects among invertebrates in giant kelp
forests. Three species of trochid gastropods occur in central California kelp forests and
are segregated by depth. Their segregation, however, is probably related to recruitment
patterns because competition among them is weak (Watanabe 1984a). The combined
effects of competition and predation have also been shown to affect the distribution
and abundance of two other trochid species in southern California (e.g., Schmitt 1982,
1996). Sessile animals may compete for space, as well shown by the field experiments
of Chadwick (1991) on cup corals (Balanophyllia elegans and others) and the corallimopharian, Corynactis californica, in central California. These animals are segregated
into zones on hard substrata with large vertical relief, and Chadwick showed this was
caused, in part, by the ability of C. californica to reduce the reproductive output, increase
larval mortality, alter recruitment patterns, and in some cases kill the polyps of cup corals. Lowry and Pearse (1973) suggested that, based on their distribution, abalone and sea
urchins may compete for space in crevice habitats, and Tegner and Levin (1982) argued
they may compete for food. Neither suggestion has been investigated with field manipulations. Schmitt (1987) demonstrated “apparent competition” between gastropods and
bivalves in a kelp forest at Catalina Island in southern California. The two groups naturally separate by habitat, suggesting they compete. However, experiments showed that
predator (lobster, octopi, and whelks) densities increased when the two groups of prey
co-occurred, causing higher mortalities of both than when they occurred separately.
The separation results from predation, therefore, and not competition.
There are clearly numerous facilitative and competitive interactions that affect the
structure and dynamics of giant kelp forests. Current knowledge, however, indicates
that the most important of these, at least in California, are related to variation in the

174

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

abundance of giant kelp and the extensive habitat it provides, and consequent effects on
light resources. In dense stands that can exist as discrete forests or as patches within
a forest, these effects can cascade, affecting other facilitative, competitive, and trophic
interactions. Giant kelp plants are generally distributed nonuniformly, but this may not
result in variation in the benthic light environment even within a stand because of the
spread of the canopy and fronds in the water column. These attributes tend to homogenize effects on light such that the patch scale affected is that of individual stands rather
than areas within them. Other interactions within a giant kelp stand, such as those
among and between understory algae, invertebrates, and bottom-dwelling fishes, are
more “patchy” in occurrence (see Chapter 5), primarily because these taxa tend to reside
in relatively small patches that are affected by more than just the light environment and
habitat produced by giant kelp. Judging the relative importance of these smaller-scale
interactions to the structuring of the entire forest requires understanding the distribution of the various kinds of patches and interactions among them, knowledge that is
currently far from complete.

FACILITATIVE AND COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS

•

17 5

This page intentionally left blank

8
GRAZING IN KELP
COMMUNITIES
During the course of this study some southern California kelp beds have
suffered depredation chiefly by sea urchins. Certain beds have been severely
damaged or even completely destroyed by grazing. Others, however, have never
shown evidence of excessive grazing pressures.
—Leighton (1971)

The major agent of loss of kelp other than water motion and natural senescence of
fronds is grazing. A rich and diverse array of species make their living feeding on kelp
and kelp-derived detritus within most kelp forests, both directly and indirectly through
the food web and trophic interactions. As illustrated in previous chapters, these interactions occur across many feeding types and up to five trophic levels. These include primary producers (kelp and other algae), primary consumers (the herbivores), secondary
consumers (smaller mobile predators), and tertiary consumers (or secondary predators;
figure 5.11), with some authors delineating a higher level of apex predators (large predators such as killer whales and sharks that may cause trophic cascades by having a strong
influence on important prey species or trophic levels; e.g., Carr and Reed, in press).
Among primary consumers, a distinction is often made that depends on the source
of food and mode of feeding. Primary consumers include grazers that feed directly
on living attached algae, detritivores feeding on detached drift or litter material, and
planktivores feeding on material produced in or imported into a kelp forest (Graham et
al. 2008). Most grazers and detritivores, however, will feed on all types of algae depending on availability and therefore those categories are not mutually exclusive. Here, we
simply refer to these herbivores as grazers, in the interest of simplicity.
Animals that feed on algae range in size from microscopic crustaceans and snails
to large herbivorous fishes. Historically, the now extinct dugong-like Steller’s sea cow
(Hydrodamalis gigas), which reached 8 m or so in length and occurred along the west
coast of North America, was the largest grazing animal in kelp forests, feeding on giant

1 77

kelp canopies and inshore algae as it lolled around the sea surface nearshore (Domning
1972, Anderson 1995). The diversity of herbivorous taxa that can occur in giant kelp
communities is exemplified by those in Californian kelp forests (Table 8.1). Amphipods
and isopods can be extremely abundant on kelp fronds, where they graze epithelial tissue or epiphytes. Turban snails and crabs move up and down fronds, abalone feed on
drift algal material, thousands of small crustaceans and snails inhabit kelp holdfasts
and algal turfs, and chitons and sea hares graze along the sea floor. Numerous fishes
have kelp as at least part of their diet and in New Zealand a large labroid fish is almost
exclusively herbivorous within nearshore kelp stands (Clements and Choat 1993, Taylor
and Schiel 2010). However, by far the most important grazers in almost all kelp forests
worldwide are sea urchins.
Numerous publications and literature reviews have documented extensive feeding by
sea urchins on kelp, removing attached plants, and creating unforested patches largely
devoid of all kelps and other macroalgae (e.g., Lawrence 1975, Foster and Schiel 1985,
Schiel and Foster 1986, Harrold and Pearse 1987, Graham, Vásquez, et al. 2007). Such
“overgrazing” in kelp beds is a worldwide phenomenon and has been recorded along the
west coast of North America from Baja California, Mexico (e.g., Beas-Luna and Ladah
2014), and through Alaska (e.g., Estes and Palmisano 1974), the northwest Atlantic (Hart
and Scheibling 1988), the northeast Atlantic (Fagerli et al. 2013), Britain (Kitching and
Ebling 1961, Jones and Kain 1967), New Zealand (Choat and Schiel 1982, Andrew 1988,
Schiel 1990), eastern Australia (Andrew and O’Neill 2000), and southeastern Australia
(Johnson et al. 2005). Some of the observations of such deforestation predated modern
ecology. Lawrence (1975) reported that destructive grazing by sea urchins was noted in
the mid-1800s by fishermen who saw how algae were eliminated from an area by large
populations of Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis. Concern about expanding sea urchin
populations and removal of kelp grew considerably when early scuba diving scientists
noticed “feeding fronts” composed of thousands of individuals of S. purpuratus and
S. franciscanus removing large tracts of kelp in southern California (Leighton 1971).
Several causes of these outbreaks were hypothesized, including expanding urbanization
effects and excessive fishing of top predators that might once have kept urchin populations
in check (North and Pearse 1970). Similar observations of vast areas denuded of kelp along
the coasts of Nova Scotia, Canada (e.g., Chapman 1981), New Zealand (Choat and Schiel
1982), and more recently Chile (Vásquez and Buschmann 1997), Australia (Johnson
et al. 2005), and Norway (Fagerli et al. 2013), but with different species of urchins and
kelp, highlighted that the importance of kelp–urchin interactions had a far wider context
than just southern California. In Nova Scotia, however, there was little urbanization and
the major suspected cause of urchin population explosions was the removal of top predators, especially the lobster Homarus americanus, through overfishing. Breen and Mann
(1976) were the first to formalize this in a simple model involving lobster biomass, urchin
densities, and kelp loss. This was essentially the start both of marine “trophic cascades”
(Sala, Boudouresque et al. 1998), a term coined by Paine (1980; see Polis et al. 2000),

17 8

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

table 8.1

Common grazing invertebrates in California giant kelp forests that
remove tissue from kelps or affect recruitment.

Species

Common namea

Grazing effects

phylum echinodermata
Strongylocentrotus
franciscanus
S. purpuratus
Lytechinus pictus
(=anamesus)
Centrostephanus
coronatus
Patiria miniata

Red sea urchin
Purple sea urchins
White sea urchin

–
Bat star

Directly removes plants; consumes all
parts of plants
As above
May graze juvenile kelp, portions of
holdfasts, and lower fronds, weakening
plant attachment
Grazes drift plants; possibly grazes
holdfasts
At high densities, may graze microscopic
stages, affecting recruitment and early
survival

phylum mollusca
Haliotis rufescens

Red abalone

Feeds extensively on drift kelp; may graze
attached stipes and sporophylls
H. fulgens
Green abalone
As above
H. corrugata
Pink abalone
As above
Tegula brunnea
Brown turban snail
Abundant on giant kelp, other kelp,
Stephanocystis (=Cystoseira). Grazes
surface of blades and fronds, may
weaken tissue
T. funebralis
Black turban snail
Same as above but only in low intertidal
zone
T. pulligo
Dusky turban snail
As above
T. eiseni
Banded turban snail As above
T. montereyi
Monterey turban snail As above
T. aureotincta
Gilded turban snail
As above
Norrisia norrisi
Norris’s top snail
As above
Calliostoma
Purple-ringed top
Eats kelp, but probably feeds mainly on
annulatum
snail
bryozoans, diatoms, detritus
Megastraea undosa
Wavy top snail
Found on substratum; may graze lower
stipes and sporophylls
Pomaulax gibberosus Red top snail
As above. Often found grazing drift kelp
(=Astrea gibberosa)
at night.
Alia (=Mitrella)
Carinated dove snail Abundant on giant kelp blades; feeds
carinata
mainly on diatoms and detritus
Lacuna unifasciata
Chinkshell
Feeds on stipes, producing pits
(continued)

table 8.1

(Continued)

Species

Common namea

Grazing effects

Megathura crenulata

Giant keyhole limpet

Discurria (=Lottia)
insessa
Lottia instabilis

Seaweed limpet

Minimally affects kelps; feeds on
understory algae and ascidians
Almost exclusively on Egregia menziesii;
grazes fronds and weakens them
On stipes of laminarian spp. and Pterygophora; no evidence of damage to plants
Only indirect effects; may graze algal
spores
As above
On encrusting corallines; as above
Grazes on bottom; effects unknown
Occasional grazing on lower portions of
giant kelp; mostly feed along bottom
Grazes on Egregia; effects unknown

Ischnochiton
intersinctus
Lepidozona cooperi
Tonicella lineata
Cryptochiton stelleri
Aplysia californica
A. vicarria

Unstable seaweed
limpet
–
–
Lined limpet
Gumboot chiton
California brown
seahare
California black
seahare

phylum arthropoda
Pentidotea (=Idotea)
resecata

Kelp isopod

Paracerceis cordata

Pillbug

Parampithoe
(=Ampithoe)
humeralis
A. rubricata
Cymadusa uncinata
Limnoria algarum

Kelp curler

–
–
Gribble

Pugettia producta
Taliepus nuttalli

Kelp crab
Southern kelp crab

On giant kelp and Pelagophycus; eats
holes in blades, causing weakening and
providing centers for infection
May derive nourishment from kelp, but
no visible damage
Rolls and cements edges of blades to form
a sticky web; probably feeds on blades
As above
As above
Burrows into holdfasts and may cause
weakening
Mainly herbivorous; eats kelp and other algae
As above

a. Common names are from North (1971a) and Morris et al. (1980).

and an influential and pervasive literature on trophic control of kelp forest food webs.
This early work of Breen and Mann, based on observations, field and lab experiments,
and empirically based modeling led to one of the most hotly debated topics in the marine
ecological literature about the causes of urchin population explosions and the role of
predators in them (review in Elner and Vadas 1990). Urchin–kelp relationships, their
causes and effects, have probably spawned more research and speculation than any other

18 0

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

interactions in kelp forests worldwide (e.g., Dayton 1985b, Andrew 1988, Vásquez and
Buschmann 1997, Graham, Vásquez, et al. 2007, for reviews), and the literature on the
topic is more like a torrent than a cascade.
Although the direct role of urchin grazing on kelp can be fairly unequivocal and
readily observed, it has proven to be far more problematical and elusive to tie down
definitive relationships between predators and sea urchins. Numerous species of fish,
lobsters, other crustaceans, octopus, sea stars, predatory snails, and some mammals
(including humans) eat sea urchins at various stages of their life history, and their larvae
are no doubt eaten by predatory plankton and nekton. Whether or not they “control,”
or are even capable of controlling, urchin populations is a topic of continued debate.
Predator–urchin relationships tend to be far more diff use than those of urchin–kelp
interactions, predatory effects are rarely seen directly, and historical reconstructions
of putative past relationships, such as before modern fishing and (in some cases) the
extirpation of marine mammals, are largely surmised and speculative, leaving ample
room for plausible alternative explanations.
In this chapter, we discuss these relationships and interactions with respect to giant
kelp forests. The evidence is skewed with respect to case studies, which come mostly
from the coast of California. We call on the literature from other areas to gain a wider
perspective on predators–urchins–kelp relationships. Furthermore, there are other
grazing and predator interactions not involving sea urchins that can be at least locally
important in giant kelp forests.

K E LP – S E A U R C HIN INTE R AC TI O N S

Sea urchins are generally the most obvious grazers in Macrocystis forests and kelp beds
worldwide, and their extensive grazing effects have been recorded in various habitats in
tropical, temperate, and boreal regions (Lawrence 1975). From the extensive literature on
this topic, a few general patterns have emerged relating to urchin feeding activities and
effects in kelp-dominated habitats. Sea urchins within kelp forests feed mostly on drift
algal material (Mattison et al. 1977, Vadas 1977, Duggins 1981, Foster and Schiel 1985,
Harrold and Reed 1985) and even when quite abundant they often have little effect on
attached kelp (Lowry and Pearse 1973, Foster 1975b, Cowen et al. 1982). This is at least
partially due to them being widely dispersed in cracks and crevices where drift algae
accumulate. Extensive feeding on attached plants appears to be initiated by a shortage of
drift algae that triggers behavioral changes to active foraging (Dean et al. 1984, Harrold
and Reed 1985), and which may also be intensified by the dispersion of individuals and
their increasing densities within patches of substratum (e.g., Schiel 1982, Lauzon-Guay
and Scheibling 2007a). Once a dense aggregation of urchins is formed, often containing
>90 animals per square meter (figure 8.1), a “feeding front” emerges that can advance
through a kelp forest. Urchins in the vanguard are often large and tightly packed together
(Leighton 1971, Dean et al. 1984) and most or all plants in their path are consumed or

GRAZING IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

181

figure 8.1
Two modes of sea urchin grazing. A: active front of S. purpuratus (gray in photo) and S. franciscanus (larger
urchins, dark to black in appearance) moving into a kelp forest in Baja California, with a Garibaldi (Hypsypops
rubicundus, center) and Señorita (Oxyjulis californica; upper right) in the water. B: stationary aggregation of
S. franciscanus surrounded by foliose red algae in central California. S. franciscanus are 15–20 cm diameter.
source: (A) Photo courtesy of Ron J. McPeak, UCSB Library Digital Collection. (B) Photo by M. Foster.

removed. Because urchins graze mostly through holdfasts and the lower fronds of kelp
and detach often large plants, much material can be made available on which urchins
nearby can feed, although urchins further back in aggregations can be food limited and
resort to active foraging (Mattison et al. 1977). Urchin-dominated areas with little or no
kelp can persist for many years, even decades (Chapman 1981, Andrew and Choat 1982).
These areas were called “barren grounds” by Pearse et al. (1970), a term that persists
to the present in various forms (e.g., urchin barrens; Hughes et al. 2012). Although
usually devoid of kelp, these areas can have a rich array of other macroalgae and sessile
invertebrates (Choat and Andrew 1986, Graham 2004, Vásquez et al. 2006) and support
a different suite of fishes (Choat and Ayling 1987) and large invertebrates (Graham 2004,
Johnson et al. 2005) than found in nearby kelp beds. Harrold and Pearse (1987) therefore
recommended that rather than “barren grounds” such areas should simply be referred
to as “deforested,” a term used by many. In a study from the Channel Islands National
Park in southern California, for example, Graham (2004) found there was a 36% reduction in the number of species (by 96, of 274 taxa) from forested to deforested areas,
but that the vast majority of species were more abundant in kelp forests. Larger mobile
invertebrates such as abalone moved out of deforested areas and, of course, there was
a loss of the canopy fish assemblage. Similarly, in Tasmania, southeast Australia, Ling
(2008) found that of the 296 taxa recorded in an area, 221 were present within intact kelp
beds and 72 within deforested areas. In the deforested areas, these were mostly coralline algae, low-lying turfs, and numerous small sessile and mobile invertebrates. These
deforested areas can be self-sustaining because the remaining algal turfs can be good
recruitment grounds for sea urchins (Andrew and Choat 1982, Kenner 1992). For example, Rowley (1989) found in southern California that there was no significant difference

18 2

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

in urchin recruitment into turfs within kelp forests and in deforested patches. He found
up to 1000 recruit urchins per meter square in these turfs. Eventually, however, these
areas usually are reinhabited by kelp, but only after urchins reach suitably low densities,
usually through disease (Pearse et al. 1977, Scheibling 1986), recruitment failure, or
storms (Ebeling et al. 1985; Scheibling and Lauzon-Guay 2010). The sequence can also
be reversed with kelps re-establishing first due to changes in oceanographic conditions
(Harrold and Reed 1985) or the availability of alternative food for sea urchins (Duggins
1981), causing the urchins to shift back to passive feeding.
Given the general phenomena of intensive grazing by sea urchins on kelp, however,
there are many variations on the theme because of the large compositional differences
in giant kelp forests worldwide, and in the diversity of grazers, types of urchins, and
their behaviors (Schiel and Foster 1986, Graham, Vásquez, et al. 2007). Although most
of the descriptions of effects of sea urchins on Macrocystis come from the west coast of
North America where extensive deforestation has occurred from time to time, there
have also been extensive episodes in Tasmania, Australia (Johnson et al. 2011), and some
less extensive episodes in southern South America (Graham, Vásquez, et al. 2007).
Although other areas are known to have had extensive grazing by sea urchins in kelp
beds, such as northern New Zealand (Andrew and Choat 1982, Andrew 1988), there
have been no similarly recorded extensive effects in Macrocystis forests (Schiel 1990,
Schiel et al. 1995), which is perhaps a reflection of fewer studies.
Particular conditions seem to be associated with overgrazing by sea urchins, but not
all of these are the same between biogeographic regions. In northern Chile, for example, where the dominant kelp is Lessonia trabeculata and not Macrocystis, the urchin
Tetrapygus niger can maintain deforested patches in areas of high water motion (Vásquez
1993). In southern Chile, the urchin Loxechinus albus appears to have few effects on the
abundant Macrocystis stands, but there are some exceptions. It was initially found that
Loxechinus was in low densities or absent in most places in southern Chile and that it
did not affect Macrocystis populations (Castilla and Moreno 1982, Santelices and Ojeda
1984a, 1984b, Vásquez et al. 1984, Castilla 1985). In their review of herbivore–kelp
interactions in Chile, Vásquez and Buschmann (1997) concluded that in central and
southern Chile, Macrocystis beds were not controlled by sea urchins. However, from his
observations and experiment in the 1970s, Dayton (1985b) concluded that Macrocystis
populations seem to be limited by physical factors in the fiords and by Loxechinus grazing in most other places. Dayton recorded high densities of Loxechinus and low densities
of Macrocystis in some of the more exposed sites. More recently, it was found that when
Loxechinus densities were over 20 m−2, Macrocystis sporophytes in an annual population
were reduced from 24 to 2 m−2 (cited in Graham, Vásquez, et al. 2007). Because of the
long and heterogeneous coastline of southern Chile, and the wide array of Macrocystis
populations, it appears the jury is still out on the ecological role of sea urchins in this
region. Graham, Vásquez, et al. (2007) concluded, however, that large-scale overgrazing
is a relatively rare occurrence there.

GRAZING IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

183

“Overgrazing” by sea urchins has elicited comment and concern from the early days
of the marine ecological literature. To early diving scientists, the appearance of vast
feeding fronts of sea urchins and destruction of large tracts of kelp must have been
alarming. It would have been rare to see wholesale change in a giant kelp forest as it was
happening and to some the notion that a whole forest could be removed did not seem to
be the natural state of things. Indeed, Leighton (1971) recorded that “at that time Conrad
Limbaugh was one of the few scientific diving personnel aware of the potential threats
by grazing populations (Limbaugh (1955).” North (1971a) and colleagues therefore examined grazing effects as integral to the accumulating knowledge of kelp forest ecology.
In the Point Loma kelp forest off San Diego, for example, Leighton (1971) recorded a
“grazing front” and “frontal attack” of a dense aggregation of urchins on giant kelp.
There was a gradation of percentages of different species of urchins from the front
toward the back of the aggregation. Ninety-four percent of urchins at the front were the
large red urchin Strongylocentrotus franciscanus and 6% were the smaller purple urchin
S. purpuratus, with a combined weight of almost 2.5 kg m−2 . Eighteen meters back
from the front, these percentages were reversed, and the biomass was halved because of
the smaller sizes of S. purpuratus. Over a period of 2 months, the entire kelp stand of
91 × 183 m was destroyed, leaving only remnants of holdfasts and encrusting coralline algae. Leighton also recorded that small urchins may tunnel into holdfasts and
destabilize them, making them prone to removal. He found a single holdfast with 52 S.
franciscanus and 45 S. purpuratus.
This type of dramatic, real-time observation of wholesale destruction has been reenacted more recently in southeastern Australia, where one of the most extensive incursions of sea urchins into kelp communities has been seen. The diadematid urchin Centrostephanus rodgersii was seen in limited numbers in sites along northeastern Tasmania
in Bass Strait in 1974. Johnson et al. (2005) reported the expansion and spread of populations along the eastern coast of Tasmania. By 1981, the overall density of sea urchins
had not changed, but they were more aggregated and restricted to depths greater than
10 m, where reefs were largely devoid of macroalgae. The progressive expansion of
urchin populations affected several fucoids and the kelps Ecklonia radiata and L. corrugata and, later, Macrocystis. C. rodgersii is known to have a large effect on macroalgal
assemblages around 700 km further north in central and southern New South Wales,
where up to 50% of shallow reefs are barrens habitat (Andrew and O’Neill 2000). Along
eastern Tasmania, up to 40% of boulder reefs at 20–25 m depth and around 20%
between 5 and 30 m are barrens. Johnson et al. (2005) also recorded a high proportion
of “incipient barrens” that were actively forming. It is interesting to note that two sea
urchin species were present and can occur in high densities (C. rodgersii and Heliocidaris erythrogramma) but, unlike the case in California, these species were negatively
correlated and Heliocidaris plays little role in the production and maintenance of barrens
habitat along the coastline, although it may do so at a small scale in some sheltered bays
(Johnson et al. 2005, Ling et al. 2010). Macrocystis has declined in almost all places, in

18 4

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

many areas to near zero (Johnson et al. 2005, 2011). As elsewhere, there was a negative
correlation between urchin numbers and those of kelp and large invertebrates, particularly abalone and lobsters.

WHY D O UR CHIN S R AMPAGE?

The formation of urchin feeding fronts and initiation of destructive grazing are topics of
considerable debate. The mechanisms underlying them may be proximal and more remote,
and may vary in type and magnitude among biogeographic regions. Johnson et al. (2005)
noted that “it is important to emphasise that the mechanisms underpinning the incursion
of C. rodgersii into Tasmania may not be related to those underpinning the formation of
barrens habitat.” In general, the proximal causes seem to be massive recruitment of sea
urchins, a shortage of drift algae and detrital material, a switch in behavioral mode from
passive feeding to active foraging, and self-sustaining of barren habitats through continual
recruitment. The more remote causes relate to oceanographic regimes and reduction or
loss of predators. However, as in all things ecological, these factors are confounded and
interact in various ways across the giant kelp forests and bioregions of the world.
Echinoderms have long been known to have sporadic and highly variable recruitment episodes. For example, Ebert (1968) found unusually good recruitment of
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus in Oregon in 1963, but no or poor recruitment from 1964
through 1978. He found that recruitment to populations of the same species in southern California and Mexico was more frequent but still varied greatly among years (Ebert
1983). It is generally thought that such variable recruitment relates to temperature, food
availability and quality, and oceanographic conditions affecting planktonic larvae. Hart
and Scheibling (1988), in a study of the northern sea urchin S. droebachiensis, found
experimentally that food quality and quantity affected survival at higher temperatures.
They concluded the extensive barrens that formed along Nova Scotia were the result
of intense sea urchin recruitment coinciding with a period of warm temperatures in
one year, and that these were augmented by subsequent recruitment into altered habitats.
It is obvious that the density of sea urchins plays a critical role in feeding fronts.
There seem to be critical threshold densities required for destructive grazing episodes
to be initiated, but several factors can contribute to these. Dean et al. (1984) found that
urchins reached densities of 47 m−2 in a destructive feeding aggregation in a giant kelp
forest in southern California but only 7 m−2 in stationary gatherings. Feeding fronts in
kelp beds in Nova Scotia were seen to reach hundreds per square meter (Lauzon-Guay
and Scheibling 2007a) but when they had a mass less than around 2 kg m−2 they did not
destructively graze, a conclusion drawn earlier by Breen and Mann (1976). Observations
worldwide are that the numbers necessary to maintain deforested areas are far less than
those that formed them originally (e.g., Ling et al. 2009).
As Johnson et al. (2005) pointed out, however, the high numbers of urchins must
act in tandem with other factors to be destructive. One of the main correlates of such

GRAZING IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

18 5

destructive grazing is the reduction or absence of algal drift. Many studies have identified drift algae and algal detritus as the main food of urchins in kelp forests (e.g., Mattison et al. 1977). Dean et al. (1984), for example, found that stationary aggregations of
the red urchin S. franciscanus subsisted on drift algae. Aggregations formed and active
foraging began after 2 years of declining kelp abundance. They concluded that the formation of feeding fronts appeared to entail a behavioral shift related to the availability
of drift algae. Harrold and Reed (1985) combined several of these factors in a qualitative
model that involved drift algae, behavioral shifts, hydrographic conditions, and kelp
abundance (figure 8.2). In their study at San Nicolas Island off southern California, they
found that brown algae, mostly Macrocystis, comprised 87–98% of drift algal biomass
across several sites. The drift biomass was lower in winter when storm activity is greatest, which transports drift out of kelp forests. When drift algae decreased, movement
of S. franciscanus increased. In barren areas, the urchins were poorly nourished and
they actively grazed on remnant algae, compared to inside kelp forests where drift was
plentiful. Harrold and Reed saw a gradual shift of substantial recruitment of kelp into
some barrens, a transformation of deforested areas back into kelp stands, the production of more algal drift, less movement of sea urchins, and an abandonment of open
habitats for protected cracks and crevices. Their model, therefore, shows that that the
transformation from kelp dominated to barrens can be triggered by a behavioral switch
in urchin feeding mode from passive feeding to active foraging without a change in
urchin numbers. This is a result of the availability of drift, which itself depends on the
amount of growing, attached kelp, which is regulated by prevailing hydrographic conditions. As in other areas, storms played a role both in the production and in the transport
of drift algae. Others have found that severe wave action can affect urchin aggregations
directly, especially in shallow water, and cause them to clump (Cowen et al. 1982) or
disperse (Lauzon-Guay and Scheibling 2007a, 2007b).
The Tasmanian urchin–kelp relationships are in many ways the most instructive
about underlying mechanisms and their interactions. In this case, kelp was known to
be historically abundant and the sea urchin responsible for destructive grazing was rare.
Centrostephanus rodgersii is an essentially warm-water species and of great ecological
importance along New South Wales to the north (Andrew and Underwood 1993, Ling
et al. 2009). The arrival in abundance of C. rodgersii to Tasmania was a range extension
brought about by the poleward penetration inshore of the East Australian Current (EAC)
(Johnson et al. 2005, Ling 2008). This caused ocean warming off eastern Tasmania of
2.3°C in the past century (Ridgway 2007). Ling et al. (2009) found that a lower threshold of 12°C for larval development was surpassed by this warming. The EAC therefore
provided both the necessary temperature and the conveyor belt for C. rodgersii larvae to
settle into Tasmanian waters. At the same time, the warmer, nutrient-poor conditions
coincided with a decline in giant kelp beds, especially since the 1980s (Edyvane 2003,
Johnson et al. 2011). These conditions combined to exacerbate the dramatic influence of
C. rodgersii on kelp stands. As in other areas, therefore, the interaction of oceanographic

18 6

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

Barren Area
Low drift
abundance

High grazing
activity

Low algal
recruitment

Low standing stock
of attached algae

Severe storms
low nutrients
warm temperatures

Hydrographic Conditions
Benign storms
high nutrients
low temperatures

High algal
recruitment

High standing stock
of attached algae

High drift
abundance

Low grazing
activity

Kelp Area
figure 8.2
Qualitative model of formation and maintenance of areas dominated
by sea urchins and giant kelp, based on work at San Nicolas Island, off
southern California. Two states or areas of kelp forests are depicted, one
with sparse kelp and dominated by storms, low nutrients, warms water,
and heavy grazing (upper panel), and the other with lush kelp and associated with benign conditions, high nutrients, low temperature, and reduced
grazing.
source: From Harrold and Reed (1985).

conditions, species life histories, giant kelp abundance, and the production of algal drift
and detritus affected the formation of barrens habitat. Rather than behavioral shifts,
however, Johnson et al. (2011) and Ling et al. (2009) argued that the severe reduction
of predators from fishing, particularly large rock lobsters, Jasus edwardsii, during the
same period had a synergistic interaction between oceanographic conditions and its
consequences on urchins and kelp, leading to decreased resilience of kelp beds and
the formation of barrens habitat. They argued that this has been a “catastrophic phase
shift,” and the expansion of barrens habitat is the single largest immediate environmental threat to the rocky reef communities of eastern Tasmania.
Tasmania stands in considerable contrast to other areas of the world where barrens
habitat has formed in Macrocystis forests. In their review of the global ecology of giant
kelp, Graham, Vásquez, et al. (2007) concluded that various instances of overgrazing in
Macrocystis-based systems have been described, but they are generally short-lived and
seen at local scales, although they can have conspicuous ecological consequences. It
appears that the Tasmanian kelp forests are particularly conspicuous in this regard.

R E V E R S I O N O F B A R R E N S T O K E L P H A B ITAT

Other than the effects of altered predation pressure (discussed below), several factors
may act in concert when intensively grazed habitats revert to kelp domination. One
of the most dramatic of these has been disease. Invertebrate pathogens and parasites
are common, and can have significant impacts on populations (e.g., Jangoux 1984).
Pearse et al. (1977) reported a mass mortality of Strongylocentrotus franciscanus near
Santa Cruz, California, that allowed a deforested area to become forested and reviewed
other occurrences of this phenomenon in California, the fi rst of which was seen in
1971. When affected, urchin spines are no longer held upright and are eventually lost,
the epidermis degenerates, and the animal usually dies. These mortalities occurred in
large but localized patches in California, and not all urchins in them were killed. Low
incidences of urchins with bacterial-infested lesions often occur in otherwise healthyappearing populations, but it is unclear whether they are related to incidences of mass
mortality (Gilles and Pearse 1986). Similar symptoms and widespread mortality have
occurred in sea urchin populations in Nova Scotia (Miller and Colodey 1983). There,
mortality was so great in 1982 that urchin tests washed up in windrows on beaches
(Scheibling and Stephenson 1984). The likely agent was infection by a Paramoeba species (Jones and Scheibling 1985). Mortality of S. droebachiensis reached 70% in shallow
inshore areas, equating to a loss of around 2 kg m−2. As elsewhere, mortalities were
temperature related. They began near the peak of seawater temperatures around 15°C
and declined when temperatures dropped to around 7°C. Urchins in deeper and cooler
waters offshore had far less mortality (around 6%). Scheibling (1986) found recurrent
outbreaks of the disease between 1980 and 1983, and the almost complete elimination
of urchins at many places along 280 km of coastline.

18 8

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

Kelp bed

Macroalgal cover (%)

100

Reverse-shift
50

F1

Forward-shift
F2
Sea urchin barren

0
Sea urchin density
figure 8.3
Phase shifts from domination by kelp and sea urchins, based on work in Tasmania. If a reef is dominated by kelp (on the upper arrow path) but close to a density threshold of sea urchins F1, a slight
increase in sea urchin density may induce a “forward-shift” to a state dominated by sea urchin barrens. A “reverse-shift” (lower arrow path) occurs only if the density of sea urchins is reduced below
a return threshold (F2). The broken gray line indicates the region of instability between the phase
states. See text for further explanations relating to altered predator abundances and oceanographic
changes.
source: Data from Scheffer et al. (2001), redrawn in Ling et al. (2009).

In other areas, such as those recorded by Harrold and Reed (1985), severe storm
activity was involved in the transition between kelp and urchin domination. Perhaps the
most unusual case was on Naples Reef off Santa Barbara, California, which underwent
two transitions within 5 years. A large storm in 1980 removed canopies of giant kelp
but left the understory kelps largely intact. Ebeling et al. (1985) found that this caused a
decline in drift kelp, triggering active grazing by S. franciscanus onto open areas of reef
and creating barrens habitat. A second storm in the winter of 1983 eliminated exposed
urchins, which were no longer hiding in cracks. Remaining turfs and the arrival of
fast-growing turfing algae facilitated survival of subsequent kelp recruits (Harris et
al. 1984). Storms, therefore, had quite different effects depending on the state of the
community.
“Phase” or “regime” shifts have been seen in many ecosystems (Scheffer et al. 2001,
Scheffer and Carpenter 2003). In Tasmania, Ling et al. (2009) put the shift between
forested and “barrens” states into the context of discontinuous phase shifts (figure 8.3).
Their conceptual model identified a threshold of sea urchin density beyond which overgrazing of kelp occurs and there is a shift to sea urchin barrens. A shift back to kelp

GRAZING IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

18 9

domination is difficult, and occurs only if sea urchin densities are returned to a much
lower threshold. There is then a region of instability between states as kelp come back to
dominance. A similar model has been used for urchin–kelp relationships in Nova Scotia
and Alaska (Filbee-Dexter and Scheibling 2014).
One consistent feature of all biogeographic regions where urchins have changed
behavior from active to passive foraging, or have been severely reduced in numbers or
eliminated from barrens habitat, is a relatively quick recruitment of kelps and reversion
back to kelp beds or kelp forests. In going through the quite large literature on urchin
barrens, however, it is interesting to note the context dependency of how processes
operate, both in the formation and in the reversal of barrens habitat. Harrold and Reed
(1985) noted that the sequence of processes they identified were intrinsic to the communities they studied and that “because the sequences are cyclic, each habitat persists
in the absence of input from outside the system.” In summary, the conclusions of many
studies of the depredation of kelp forests by sea urchins and the particular conditions
that trigger phase or regime shifts between urchin and kelp domination are akin to
saying that “every family is unhappy in its own way” (L. Tolstoy, Anna Karenina). These
examples illustrate both the variability of different systems and processes and the futility of using single models across biogeographic regions in which the species, communities, processes, oceanographic regimes, and magnitude and ecological severity of
responses are quite different.

OTHE R GR A Z E R S IN GIANT KE LP CO MMUNITIE S

Seaweeds, and especially giant kelp, support the highly diverse food webs of Macrocystis
forests and are eaten directly or as drift by myriad invertebrates. Few grazers other than
sea urchins are capable of removing large attached kelp but many species live on kelp,
feed on their tissues, and indirectly cause the removal of all or parts of the plants. For
example, grazing of kelp tissue may provide centers for fungal and bacterial infections
that can sever blades, fronds, or holdfasts. It may also provide sites for epiphyte growth
or can weaken parts of the plants, rendering them vulnerable to removal by increased
water motion or entanglement with other plants.
Across the giant kelp forests of the world, numerous species of echinoderms (other
than the sentinel species discussed above) feed directly on attached, drifting rafts, and
detrital kelp but few have more than highly localized effects. In southern California
to Baja California, Mexico, for example, the small white sea urchin Lytechinus pictus
(=anamesus) feeds extensively on small algae, particularly foliose reds, but it generally
has much less an effect on large kelps than do purple and red urchins, although in very
high densities it is known to remove adult Macrocystis by grazing through holdfasts
and lower fronds (Clarke and Neushul 1967, Dean et al. 1984). Another sea urchin, the
diadematid Centrostephanus coronatus, which is closely related taxonomically to the very
destructive Tasmanian C. rodgersii, may eat kelp (Vance 1979), but its recorded effects

19 0

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

are highly localized. It is not an aggregating species and it is not widely distributed in
giant kelp communities except at some of the Channel Islands, off southern California, and islands offshore of Baja California. Also in North American giant kelp forests,
the bat star Patiria miniata may affect algal recruitment by digesting spores and small
plants when it everts its stomach over the substratum. It is found on rocky substrata
up to densities of 4–5 m−2 in many places throughout the range of giant kelp. Bat stars
are omnivores and scavengers, and also eat tunicates and other encrusting animals.
Leonard (1994) used lab and field experiments to test the effects of P. miniata on kelp
recruitment. He found that bat stars grazed over 80% of the substratum over 90 days
when at densities greater than around 4 m−2. They locally caused mortality of Macrocystis gametophytes and young sporophytes in lab experiments but did not affect kelp
recruitment in the field. He argued that giant kelp quickly reaches a size beyond which
bat stars do not affect it, and that bat stars generally do not reach high enough densities
to affect kelp recruitment.
In the giant kelp forests of southern New Zealand, the echinometrid urchin Evechinus chloroticus is commonly found, but it has not been recorded as having more than
highly localized grazing effects on giant kelp along mainland and offshore island sites
(Schiel 1990, Schiel et al. 1995, Schiel and Hickford 2001). This urchin is ubiquitous
on rocky reefs throughout New Zealand. Although capable of creating urchin barrens in
stipitate kelp stands in northeastern New Zealand (e.g., Choat and Schiel 1982), Evechinus appears not to do this in the Macrocystis stands further south. Similarly, the urchin
Heliocidaris erythrogramma can form coralline-dominated barren grounds in stands of
stipitate kelp along much of southeastern Australia (Connell and Irving 2008), but
contributes to the formation of barren grounds only in some protected waters of Tasmania (Ling et al. 2010). In Chilean giant kelp forests, Castilla and Moreno (1982) tested
the effects of four sea urchins on giant kelp with exclusion and addition experiments.
They found that Loxechinus albus, Pseudoechinus magellanicus, Arbacia dufresnei, and
Austrocidaris canaliculata had no significant effects on recruitment or persistence of
adult Macrocystis. These sea urchins appear to feed mostly on drift Macrocystis (Vásquez
et al. 1984).
Many species of molluscs feed on kelp. Worldwide, the species would number in the
thousands. Particularly prominent in most Macrocystis forests are the abundant trochid
and turbinid snails that graze on attached kelp as well as on understory algae and the
substratum below. It is highly unusual for the grazing activities of these molluscs to
result directly in the removal of adult kelp, but indirect damage to fronds that results
in severing portions of plants is probably common. In Stillwater Cove, central California, for example, Tegula spp. reached very high densities on the bottom following the
removal of most of the giant kelp by storms during the 1982–1983 El Niño. The snails
crawled up the stipes of the remaining understory kelp Pterygophora californica and, at
densities of 20 or so per plant, their grazing retarded the growth of new sporophylls and
fronds. They also attacked the bases of the few remaining fronds on giant kelp, severing

GRAZING IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

191

them and killing the plants (Schiel and Foster observation). Riedman et al. (1981) and
Watanabe (1984a) recorded that the abundances of three species of Tegula were stratified
with depth in a Macrocystis forest near Pacific Grove, central California. Tegula brunnea
was the most abundant turban snail at 4 m depth and T. pulligo was more abundant
at 11 m, with little overlap in their distribution. A third species, T. montereyi, was the
least abundant of the three turban snails, and tended to be most common at 6 m depth.
In addition to living and feeding on large brown algae, these species can be found at
densities of up to 40 m−2 on the substratum (Watanabe 1984a) where they graze small
plants and spores. Many other grazing gastropods are present in Macrocystis forests.
In California, for example, several species of Calliostoma occur on kelp plants where
they feed on surface tissue, algal films, and sessile animals (Morris et al. 1980), but
their effects on kelp tissue are probably minimal. Alia (=Mitrella) carinata and Lacuna
unifasciata are small species, and can be the most abundant gastropods on Macrocystis
in California (Leighton 1971, Abbott and Haderlie 1980), but their grazing effects are
also probably negligible. Norrisia norrisi and turbinid snails can be abundant in kelp
forests, particularly on the fronds of Macrocystis and Eisenia (Schmitt et al. 1983). N.
norrisi feeds on sporophylls, stipes, and young kelp fronds, and Leighton (1971) reported
that stipe breakage may result from this grazing. The giant keyhole limpet Megathura
crenulata and several species of chitons may graze algal spores from the substratum,
but no significant effects on kelp have been reported. Tonicella spp. are often abundant
on encrusting corallines in central California kelp forests, and may be responsible for
keeping small areas free of other algae. The California brown sea hare, Aplysia californica, may be locally common in kelp forests and grazes on a variety of algae (Morris
et al. 1980). Individuals can occasionally be found in the tops of P. californica, grazing
on blades (Reed 1990b). A. vaccaria, the California black sea hare, is most common in
southern California and Baja California, Mexico. This species may be the world’s largest
gastropod, with individuals over 0.5 m long and weighing nearly 16 kg. The feather boa
kelp Egregia menzisii may be its primary food (Morris et al. 1980).
Abalone comprise one of the most important molluscan groups commercially
within kelp forests of California, New Zealand, and Australia. These large gastropods
are almost entirely passive feeders reliant on a supply of drift algae, which they trap
under a powerful foot. In New Zealand, large densities of Haliotis iris occur in shallow areas inshore of Macrocystis forests, where drift algae are plentiful, on mainland
sites and offshore islands (Schiel 1990, Schiel et al. 1995, Schiel and Hickford 2001).
Great densities of this species occurred historically, but their reduction through fishing
has produced no discernible wider effects (cf. Schiel 2006). It appears their ecological
role was mostly in recycling kelp and not in affecting its distribution and abundance.
In Tasmania, Johnson et al. (2011) found that an increasing seawater temperature significantly reduces size at maturity and therefore maximum shell length in H. rubra,
a commercially important species worth $100 million annually. Of great concern in
Tasmania is the effect of expanding sea urchin populations and declining kelp on this

19 2

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

species. They found increased densities of the sea urchin C. rodgersii and expanding sea
urchin barrens are associated with a significant decline in numbers of H. rubra. Along
California, several species of abalone have been serially depleted (Karpov et al. 2000) to
the extent that there is now no commercial fishery for any abalone in California, and a
very limited recreational fishery north of San Francisco. Disease has also played a role
in the severe decrease in some abalone species, such as the black abalone H. cracherodii
(e.g., Lafferty and Kuris 1993), as has predation by an expanding sea otter population
(e.g., Lowry and Pearse 1973, Watson 2000). In laboratory experiments, H. rufescens
and the red sea urchin Strongylocentrotus franciscanus compete for food, but this may
not be the case in natural conditions (Tegner and Levin 1982). There is no evidence that
abalone have any effect on attached Macrocystis.
In any given kelp forest, thousands of isopods, amphipods, and other small crustacean scuttle along kelp plants and dwell among every form of algae. Some of them have
ephemeral effects on giant kelp, which occasionally can lead to extensive damage, probably during periods when kelp are temperature or nutrient stressed. Along California,
the kelp isopod Pentidotea resecata dwells on the upper fronds and blades of Macrocystis,
and can heavily graze them (Jones 1971). North (1966) reported that this feeding activity
once extensively damaged the canopy of Macrocystis in a wide area of the Point Loma
(San Diego, California) kelp forest. The holes they create in blades from their feeding
may also act as sites for fungal and bacterial infections. Another isopod, the pillbug
Paracerceis cordata, probably causes little damage to kelp plants.
The gribble Limnoria algarum can be abundant on Macrocystis holdfasts (Andrews
1945) and may occasionally cause adult Macrocystis to be detached from the substratum.
It burrows into the haptera, forming tunnels that may severely weaken holdfasts (Jones
1971), which then can be dislodged by water motion. A related isopod can cause considerable weakening of giant kelp holdfasts in Argentina. The kelp curling amphipods
Ampithoe humeralis, A. rubricata, and Cymadusa uncinata build tubes in kelp laminae by
curling the edges of blades and sticking them together. They eat kelp and can puncture
blades with their spines and hooks (North and Schaefer 1964). Similarly, the kelp curler
Peramphithoe femorata grazes fronds of Macrocystis in north-central Chile. Cerda et al.
(2009) found that this isopod grazes apical blades of Macrocystis but this was compensated by growth in other parts of the plant. They speculated that this was a mechanism
for Macrocystis to tolerate low-level grazing. In southern California, Graham (2002)
found that intensive grazing by amphipods could result in sterility in giant kelp, but
this effect was sublethal. Other crustaceans known to feed on kelp forest seaweeds are
various spider crabs (Hines 1982), especially Taliepus nuttalli, and the kelp crab Pugettia
producta in California. Although often abundant, their grazing does not appear to have
a great effect on plants. Similarly in Chile, the kelp crab T. marginatus grazes on Macrocystis fronds but uses giant kelp mostly as a nursery (Madariaga et al. 2013). Encrusting
invertebrates, although not grazers, can heavily infest Macrocystis blades. Bernstein and
Jung (1979) found that Macrocystis blades in the Point Loma kelp forest had a rich fauna

GRAZING IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

193

of epiphytes consisting mostly of bryozoans (Membranipora membranacea, Hippothoa
hyalina [now Celleporella hyalina], and Lichenopora buskiana [now Disporella buski]), a
serpulid polychaete (Spirorbis spirillum, now Circeis spirillum), and hydroids (Obelia sp.
and Campanularia sp.), which were mostly kept in check by their life histories and
larval delivery through the kelp bed. They found that small kelp beds that were heavily
infested with Membranipora could be affected by predation on encrusted blades by the
small labrid fish, Oxyjulis californica (see also figure 7.1).
Determining how grazing species work in tandem can be a particular challenge both
conceptually and logistically because of the great number of consumers, their differing
densities, and abilities to switch food. Calculating interaction strengths is one way of
categorizing herbivory. For example, Sala and Dayton (2011) estimated the per capita
interaction strength of a suite of herbivores on the microscopic stages of Macrocystis.
These included A. humeralis, A. carinata, the wavy top snail Megastraea undosa, N. norrisi, the white urchin L. pictus, and the urchins S. franciscanus and S. purpuratus. In
aquarium experiments, they found that all of these grazers could significantly reduce
the survival of microscopic sporophytes. The strongest per capita interactions were by
L. undosum, S. franciscanus, and S. purpuratus, and the weakest by M. carinata and A.
humeralis. They modeled their results with reference to densities found in field sites,
finding that the small herbivores produced no added impact to that of bigger species
(particularly the sea urchins). Sala and Graham (2002) calculated the predator–prey
interaction strengths of 45 species in a series of laboratory experiments. They found
that the per capita interaction strengths of small grazers could be similar to those of
larger herbivores, and surmised that the greater densities of small consumers in the
field could increase their importance as grazers in the community. This is an important
point because interaction strength does not take account of densities of organisms and
can give a quite distorted view of the importance and magnitude of interactions. More
studies of the effects of small grazers would be especially informative given the low
survivorship of giant kelp microscopic stages.
Another phenomenon seen occasionally in kelp forests is when “good grazers go
bad.” Normally benign grazers, such as the turban snails mentioned earlier, can become
destructive when giant kelp abundance is reduced. In another case, restoration attempts
of transplanting giant kelp to the Palos Verdes area near Los Angeles were unsuccessful because of severe grazing of sporophytes by the fishes halfmoon (Medialuna californiensis) and opaleye (Girella nigricans), which led to the elimination of plants (North
1976). These also exemplify the problems with using interaction strengths to predict
“importance” because strength metrics like per capita consumption clearly vary with
the relative abundance of the interactors that cause changes in behavior.

Given the great biomass, complex structure, production, and turnover of Macrocystis, it
is hardly surprising that this single species can provide the fuel for such a diverse array

19 4

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

of consumers, and that environmental changes increasing or reducing its abundance
can lead to changes in herbivore behavior that may feed back to giant kelp. As more
becomes known about giant kelp forests, particularly in the less-studied areas of the
southern hemisphere, our perspective on the interrelationships between Macrocystis
and grazers is bound to change.

GRAZING IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

19 5

This page intentionally left blank

9
PREDATION AND TROPHIC
CASCADES IN KELP
COMMUNITIES
Phase shifts between forested and deforested states (the latter known as “sea
urchin barrens”) result from intense grazing due to increased abundance and
altered foraging patterns of sea urchins made possible in turn by human
removal of their predators and competitors.
—Jackson et al. (2001)

Based on these numerous field studies spanning the global range of
Macrocystis, simple trophic cascades do not seem to exist in
Macrocystis-based systems.
—Graham, Vásquez, et al. (2007)

The overwhelming focus of predation and trophic cascades in kelp communities has
been the relationships between sea urchins and their predators. From the earliest days
of observations of the formation of barren ground habitats, it was conjectured that the
reduction of predators through hunting and overfishing played a key role in the expansion of sea urchin populations (North and Pearse 1970, Breen and Mann 1976, Estes
et al. 1978). There are arguments both for and against the pervasive role of predators
and their controlling influence on sea urchin populations, and the literature has somewhat of a split personality on this topic. However, the paradigm of top-down control
has become so entrenched in the scientific literature, textbooks and popular media
that it is almost codified and taken as a base condition of kelp forest ecosystems (e.g.,
Jackson et al 2001, Cousteau and Schiefelbein 2007, Estes et al. 2011). It often seems
to be assumed that the natural state of kelp forests is tight trophic control such that
when top predators are reduced in abundances by humans, there is a “relaxation in
top-down control” on sea urchins and a subsequent decline in macroalgal abundance
(Guenther et al. 2012), often referred to as a trophic cascade. This is a corollary to the belief
in the “balance of nature” (review in Connell and Sousa 1983); it has the value of

19 7

simplicity but the unfortunate downside of being uncertain or untrue in many kelp
forests worldwide.
As discussed in Chapter 8, it is unequivocal that sea urchins and some other grazers
can greatly affect kelp community structure, mostly in localized patches but sometimes
on a much greater scale. Despite large differences in processes and their magnitude, it
is also unequivocal that across biogeographic regions a reduction or removal of dense
aggregations of grazers leads to relatively rapid recolonization by kelps. The strong
linkages across the bottom part of the trophic chain have therefore been well tested
and demonstrated. The link between predators and control of grazers as a generality,
however, is more tenuous and uncertain. That predators can influence the distribution
and abundance of prey is both obvious and demonstrated in myriad publications; after
all, predators make their living eating prey and clearly have an effect on them. The
questions are whether the strength or magnitude of such interactions are sufficient
to control prey populations and, if so, whether this occurs over wide enough spatial
and temporal scales to matter in terms of “phase shifts” or “alternate stable states” of
communities, and whether other factors are equally or more plausible, or act in concert
with predation (e.g., Elner and Vadas 1990). It is another large step to predator-mediated
trophic processes that cascade through the food web.
To understand the prevalence of predator effects in the ecological literature on kelp
forests, some background is warranted. The term “trophic cascade” came from Paine
(1980), but the concept is said to have originated in Hairston’s green world hypothesis
(Hairston et al. 1960; discussed in Polis et al. 2000). Trophic cascades are probably
the most studied indirect effect in communities (Strong 1997) and are particularly
common in freshwater and marine systems (Strong 1992). As they were originally proposed, these cascades had three levels of interactions involving predators eating herbivores, which reduced grazing pressure and allowed plants to thrive. Polis (1999) and
Polis et al. (2000) differentiated “species-level” and “community-level” cascades. In a
species-level cascade, changes in predator numbers affect one or a few plant species in
a compartment of the food web. Community-level cascades may apply to any multilevel
linear food web interaction and alter the distribution of plant biomass through an entire
system. Such community-level cascades tend to occur when the affected plant species
is dominant, there is relatively low herbivore diversity, and there are strong trophic linkages (Polis et al. 2000). As an example, Paine (1980) described a keystone predator
(a sea star) eating mussels, thereby releasing space on rocks that other species could
occupy, thereby increasing diversity of attached organisms.
The best-known and most documented indirect effects in marine communities
involve interactions between keystone predators, sea urchins and kelp, in which the
overharvesting of predators has led to increased abundances of sea urchins and a
reduction in kelp. The first papers examining these species interactions were by Mann
and Breen (1972) and Breen and Mann (1976), and involved overfishing of the lobster
Homarus americanus, dense aggregations of Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis, and severe

19 8

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

reductions of stipitate kelp in Nova Scotia. Breen and Mann (1976) noted there was a
decrease in the abundance of lobsters by around 50% in 14 years and that during the
last six of these, sea urchins destroyed around 70% of the kelp Laminaria longicruris.
Using urchin transplant experiments, they derived a threshold abundance necessary for
destructive grazing to occur (2 kg m−2). They also used underwater cages to examine
feeding rates on several invertebrates, concluding that urchins were the major item
in lobster diets (Breen and Mann 1976). They then constructed a model relating sea
urchin settlement rates and lobster biomass, which produced areas where urchins were
“controlled” and where they were not controlled. This model came at a time when there
was an increasing awareness that extensive fishing of top predators may be taking a
great toll on the structure of nearshore communities (e.g., North 1971b). Nevertheless,
the direct linkages between predators and prey and consequent indirect effects on kelp
were highly controversial, even in Nova Scotia where they were originally proposed (e.g.,
see review by Elner and Vadas 1990). Of particular note were arguments about unusually high but episodic recruitment of urchins (Scheibling and Lauzon-Guay 2010), the
role of diseases in controlling urchin populations (Scheibling et al. 2010, Feehan et al.
2012), and the weak inference about the role of predators at relevant spatial and temporal
scales (Elner and Vadas 1990).
The kelp forests of Alaska and the west coast of North America have been focal areas
of top-down regulation (Estes and Palmisano 1974, Estes et al. 1978, Estes et al. 1998),
but again some controversy remains about the extent of the roles of top predators on kelp
community structure, especially in California (e.g., Foster and Schiel 1988, Foster and
Schiel 2010). This topic and controversy has transferred across biogeographic regions. In
their review, Sala, Boudouresque et al. (1998) focused on why many algal assemblages
had been transformed to coralline “barrens” in the western Mediterranean Sea. In over
half of the studies that postulated predation as the major controlling factor of the sea
urchin Paracentrotus lividus, they found that some evidence was “completely speculative”
and that there was a lack of long-term studies on the relationship between predator depletion and increases in urchin populations in the area. However, in reviewing the numerous factors affecting the relationships between predators, urchins, and macroalgae, they
constructed a model depicting two states: one with fleshy, erect algal communities and
the other with urchin-dominated barrens of low complexity. This model in various forms
is still prevalent (e.g., Steneck 1998, Pinnegar et al. 2000, Jackson et al. 2001).
In any discussion of this topic, it is worth bearing in mind Strong’s (1992) statement
that all trophic interactions do not cascade, and single top-down dominance is not the
norm of communities or ecosystems. Menge (1992) stated that it was more appropriate
to ask how top-down and bottom-up processes affect each other and what are the mechanisms of variation. Others who highlighted the potentially serious effects of overfishing
on the structure and functioning of marine ecosystems (e.g., Worm et al. 2005) noted
that “our emphasis herein on top-down control is not meant to imply its predominance”
(Baum and Worm 2009), thereby highlighting the context dependency of such control.

PREDATION AND TROPHIC CASCADES IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

19 9

With this perspective in mind, we discuss the effects of predators and potential effects
of trophic cascades within giant kelp communities.
Fish, lobsters, and sea otters have been identified as key predators of ecologically
important grazers within kelp systems. Many factors may influence their effects,
depending on the situation and the types of predators and prey involved. In the wellstudied Macrocystis forests of California, these are primarily the sheephead wrasse
Semicossyphus pulcher, the lobster Panulirus interruptus, and the sea otter Enhydra lutris.
These and other predators of grazers are discussed below.

FI S H PR E DATI O N ON GR A Z E R S

The Californian sheephead Semicossyphus pulcher is a labrid fish common in nearshore
waters of southern California that feeds on a wide variety of prey, including sea urchins
and lobsters (review in Cowen 1983). Sheephead populations are generally more abundant in areas with vertical relief provided by kelp or rock, possibly because relief provides sheltered habitat. Spiny lobsters (Panulirus interruptus) have a similar geographic
distribution, a broad diet including sea urchins, and they shelter during daytime. They
also migrate into deeper water in winter (review in Barsky 2001).
Tegner (1980) proposed that sheephead and lobsters might control urchin populations because they eat sea urchins and because of patterns of sea urchin abundance and
distribution at offshore locations where sheephead were abundant. She noted that deforestation by sea urchins had also been observed at these offshore locations. Tegner and
Dayton (1981) examined urchin populations in the Point Loma kelp forest, at two sites
with sheephead and spiny lobsters and one site without them, to determine effects of
these predators. They found differences in urchin size-frequency distributions among
sites with and without these predators, but at three different depths, and interpreted
this as indicating predator control, an argument also made by Barry and Tegner (1990).
These studies were suggestive of predator effects, but did not actually demonstrate control of urchins because of differences in depth, vertical relief, and Macrocystis stand
structure between localities.
In one of the few large-scale manipulative experiments on predators, Cowen (1983)
removed sheephead from a 13,000 m2 site at San Nicolas Island off southern California,
and compared changes in populations of red sea urchins, Strongylocentrotus franciscanus, relative to a control site. The changes he found were mostly in the sheltering of
urchins. Where sheephead were removed, there was an increase in the total number of
sea urchins and in the number of those appearing outside of crevices. Urchins placed in
the open at the control site quickly moved to shelter or were eaten by sheephead. Cowen’s
(1983) data, however, did not show that sheephead control red sea urchin abundance.
He himself pointed out that due to limited sampling around crevices, the increased
abundances of sea urchins could have resulted from their redistribution within the
experimental area, with a net movement into the crevice areas sampled. He later deter-

200

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

mined sheephead densities at 18 additional sites in areas not extensively fished for them
and found densities varied from 0 to 510 sheephead per hectare (Cowen 1985). One-third
of the sites had densities below the threshold of 100–150 fish ha−1 that his earlier work
suggested was necessary to confine sea urchins to crevices. Cowen’s work was done in
kelp forests where sea urchins occurred mostly in and around crevices, presumably eating drift algae. There is also evidence to the contrary. Dean et al. (1984) noted at a site
with high sheephead densities of 258 ha−1 that the spatial distribution and movement
of urchin aggregations “appeared to be unrelated to predation pressure from fishes or
lobsters,” concluding that urchins exacerbate kelp declines initiated by other causes
such as storms and high temperatures / low nutrients. Furthermore, large sea urchins
appear to have a size refuge from predation by fishes (Tegner and Dayton 1981, Cowen
1983). It is still possible, however, that the predation effects of sheephead are greater
when drift algae are scarce, and urchins are actively foraging out in the open. This
interaction could have been more important historically if larger sheephead were very
abundant and were able to keep the number of small and intermediate-sized urchins
in check during periods of low abundance of drift algae. The initiation of the fish effect
on urchins, however, seems more likely to be due to kelp dynamics and the production
of drift (i.e., urchins stay in cracks and crevices feeding passively or are out in the open
when drift is scarce) than to a controlling influence of fish.
An intriguing recent clue about these potential effects has come from a comparison of
data from Cowen’s work, a later period of intensive commercial fishing of sheephead in the
1990s, and a period in the late 2000s after management intervention reduced the fishery
at San Nicolas Island off southern California. Hamilton et al. (2014) used gut content and
stable isotope analyses and found evidence of dietary expansion after the 10-year recovery
period that included increased consumption of sea urchins and other mobile invertebrates
by large fish, compared to small crabs and suspension / filter feeding invertebrates during
the period of heavy fishing when fish were much smaller (see also Chapter 12). There was
a 140 mm increase in average fish length and the largest fish were males, which had been
severely reduced by the earlier fishery. Their surveys indicated these dietary changes were
not due to altered prey availability but because of the number of large sheephead capable
of handling prey, a shift in life history traits seen in other once-heavily fished areas of
southern California (Hamilton et al. 2007). The resulting increase in sheephead biomass
within the Channel Islands reserves was correlated with a decrease in sea urchin densities and an increase in fleshy algae, including Macrocystis stipe densities (Hamilton and
Caselle 2015). The stable isotope analyses of Page et al. (2013) also showed that some rocky
reef fish at higher trophic levels were feeding mostly on invertebrates rather than on fish,
as was often assumed. How these changes might affect urchin populations and kelp, in
tandem with climatic and other factors, remains to be seen.
There is little other evidence of fish predation effects on grazers that have a major
impact on Macrocystis. Small animals on kelp fronds are one trophic pathway linking
kelp and animals at higher trophic levels, such as fish (e.g., Jones 1988, Holbrook et al.

PREDATION AND TROPHIC CASCADES IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

2 01

1990), and there are hundreds of species that feed on small crustaceans and snails (Carr
and Reed, in press). Moreno and Jara (1984) reported that amphipods dominated fish
diets within a kelp forest in Tierra del Fuego, Chile. Although grazing by the kelp curling
amphipod Peramphithoe femorata can induce compensatory growth dynamics in Macrocystis fronds in central Chile (Cerda et al. 2009, 2010), there have been no reports of
widespread effects of predators having much influence on them. Similarly, amphipods
may have small-scale effects on Macrocystis fronds in central New Zealand. Pérez-Matus
and Shima (2010) used mesocosm experiments to test the effects of two labrid fishes,
Notolabrus celidotus and N. fucicola, on amphipods and their grazing. They found that
N. celidotus had a large and significant effect on amphipod survival (as did Jones [1988]
in another kelp system in New Zealand), whereas N. fucicola had no effect. They also
found, however, that the presence of N. fucicola reduced damage to kelp fronds because
amphipods sought shelter and reduced foraging. They concluded that these types of traitmediated interactions on prey behavior may benefit giant kelp in diverse communities.
The most thorough field-based studies on the interactive effects of small grazers, fish,
and kelp were done by Davenport and Anderson (2007), who did a series of experiments
at Santa Catalina Island, southern California, in which they excluded or included fish
using large cages. They then tested for the abundances of small grazers and their effects
on kelp growth. The primary mesograzers were the isopod Pentidothea resecta and the
gammarid amphipod Ampithoe humeralis, and the main micro-carnivorous fish were the
kelp perch Brachyistius frenatus and the señorita Oxyjulis californica. They found there was
a significant increase in mesograzers with fish exclusion, which led to increased grazing
and poorer growth of Macrocystis (see figure 7.1). Removal of fish exclusion cages resulted
in a quick return of mesograzers to ambient levels. They also found that there was a critical threshold of fish abundance that affected mesograzer biomass, but that there was no
difference in effects between the fish species. Davenport and Anderson’s study, therefore,
provided direct field-based evidence for mesograzers reducing kelp performance, which
was mediated by the abundances of fish. As in previous examples, these apparently diffuse effects can have specific and nonintuitive impacts on localized kelp forests.

LO B S TE R PR E DATI O N ON GR A Z E R S

As for fish, the role of lobsters in controlling overgrazing by sea urchins has been greatly
debated. The scene was very much set for this debate in eastern Canada, where lobsters
were first considered to be a primary candidate in the great expansion of urchin populations, due to a large reduction in the numbers of these predators from fishing (Breen
and Mann 1976). The debate continued for decades, sometimes getting quite vitriolic,
at least in terms of the normally sedate writing of the scientific literature (Miller 1985,
1986, 1987, Keats 1986, Breen 1987). Scheibling’s (1996) review concluded for eastern
Canada that “our understanding of interactions between this species (sea urchins) and
its predators is insufficient to support any generalizations about the role of predation in

202

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

regulating populations.” It seems to be mostly accepted now that disease, recruitment
dynamics, and an active sea urchin fishery play critical roles in periods of urchin population expansion and demise there. However, an important caveat is that it is not possible to have a true understanding of ecological baselines because of historical overfishing
of many species. There is considerable correlative evidence that overfishing of cod and
several other commercially exploited fish species over several decades is associated with
changes throughout the food web (Frank et al. 2005, Scheffer et al. 2005).
Tegner (1980) was the first to suggest that in southern California, where no sea
otters had been present for over a century, sheephead and the California spiny lobster
Panulirus interruptus might control sea urchin populations. In the Point Loma kelp forest, Tegner and Dayton (1981) examined variation in size-frequency distributions of live
and dead sea urchins and made other observations at three sites, two with sheephead
and spiny lobsters and one without, to determine the potential combined effects of
these predators. Differences between sea urchin size-frequency distributions among
sites with sheephead and lobsters and the site without these predators were interpreted
as indicating predator control. This was further argued by Barry and Tegner (1990).
These results were suggestive but equivocal; there was no replication of the area without
predators, there were differences in depth and topography among sites, and others have
shown that urchin size-frequency distributions similar to those found in these earlier
studies can also result from sporadic recruitment (Ebert et al. 1993).
Tegner and Levin (1983) provide the primary data concerning lobster predation on
sea urchins. They found that lobsters preferentially fed on Strongylocentrotus purpuratus,
and ate all sizes of them, in laboratory choice experiments. They interpreted this as
accounting for the unimodal size-frequency distribution of live animals observed in the
field where lobsters and sheephead were common. They also found in their laboratory
experiments that lobsters would eat S. franciscanus, but mostly consumed intermediate
sizes. This was suggested to account for the bimodal size distribution of live red sea
urchins in the field where the two predators were common. The laboratory experiments
of Tegner and Levin (1983) also determined consumption rates of sea urchins by lobsters
in the laboratory, which is a good assay of potential feeding rates if no other food is available, but it is not possible to relate these to natural populations because lobsters were
only fed sea urchins, which comprise only part of the natural diet of lobsters. From these
results and landing data for the lobster fishery, Tegner and Levin (1983) concluded lobsters and sheephead controlled sea urchin populations until fishing reduced their abundance in the 1950s, leading to increases in sea urchin populations and deforestation.
Lafferty (2004) and Behrens and Lafferty (2004) argued for lobster control of sea
urchin populations based on field survey data from the northern Channel Islands off
southern California. Data were the abundances of sea urchins and the size-frequency
distributions of live and dead sea urchins at fished sites and at reserve sites where
fishing was not permitted. There were significantly more lobsters and fewer urchins
at reserve sites. Based on size-frequency distributions of live S. franciscanus and

PREDATION AND TROPHIC CASCADES IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

2 03

S. purpuratus, Behrens and Lafferty (2004) stated that these matched those suggested
by Tegner and Levin (1983) to be the result of lobster predation. Both studies concluded
these relationships verified the hypothesis that spiny lobsters control sea urchin populations in the field.
These data, although frequently cited as evidence for lobster control of urchins, are
not conclusive about the role of lobsters. There are plausible alternative hypotheses and
inconsistencies in the data and interpretation. The two reserve sites were very close
together (within about 1 km) within the same reserve on the western end of Anacapa
Island, while the fished sites were more widely separated and positioned to the east of
the reserve on other islands (Lafferty 2004). The lack of interspersion of sites can be
problematic here because ocean circulation around the Channel Islands is complex,
leading to small-scale differences in the distribution of organisms (e.g., Reed et al.
2000). Murray et al. (1980) indicate that Anacapa Island is a warm biogeographic region
distinct from the other Channel Islands. It also should be recognized that differences
in size-frequency distributions may result from sporadic recruitment rather than from
predation (Ebert et al. 1993) and are affected by habitat quality.
These studies highlight many of the problems relating to interpretation of pattern,
as we seek to understand wide-ranging and sometimes diff use effects. In this case, the
“experiment” was fished and unfished sites. Ideally, these sites should be as similar as
possible, with the same topography and depth structures, in the same biogeographic
regions (or interspersed among them), either nested within oceanographic features or
interspersed among them, and sampled over a long enough time period to yield treatment effects instead of “noise” or natural fluctuations. Unfortunately, nature rarely
comes arrayed in convenient packages and so researchers are constrained to gleaning
what they can from the data available. It makes ecology interesting, but also can compromise inferential ability, and it requires scientists to consider alternative hypotheses
that potentially explain the same data.
Guenther et al. (2012) asked whether “fishing can trigger trophic cascades that
alter community structure and dynamics and thus modify ecosystem attributes,” with
respect to the lobster Panulirus interruptus and sea urchins in a kelp forest near Santa
Barbara, California. They found the answer to be a qualified “no.” From eight years of
survey and fishing data at eight sites, they compared lobster abundances (as measured
by the commercial catch in each of the eight areas), and sea urchin density, as well as sea
urchin abundance versus kelp abundance. They then tested the extent to which these
were related to the intensity of lobster fishing, as measured by the number of lobster
traps lifted. Guenther et al. were unable to detect meaningful relationships between lobster and urchin abundance data, partially because they tended to be quite variable over
the years. Algal biomass and urchin densities were unrelated across sites and years, but
at two sites (Naples and Carpinteria Reefs) a decline in urchin densities coincided with
increases in kelp biomass. Although they found no significant relationships between
any of the measure relating to lobsters, urchins, and algae, they only suggested cau-

2 04

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

tiously that “a trophic cascade caused by lobster fishing . . . is not ubiquitous in the Santa
Barbara Channel marine ecosystem.”
The general lack of significant relationships between metrics of urchins, predators,
and giant kelp was noted by Foster and Schiel (2010). Their analyses were based mostly
around the Point Loma (San Diego) kelp bed, which is a frequently cited focus of trophic
cascades in giant kelp ecosystems (cf. Jackson et al. 2001, Steneck et al. 2002). Their
examination of all available data on urchin and kelp abundances, and commercial landings of kelp, sheephead, urchins, and lobsters, showed that there was no widespread
decline in kelp forests in the region between 1950 and 1970, as had been indicated (Jackson et al. 2001) but there were localized declines in mainland kelp forests near the rapidly growing cities of Los Angeles and San Diego. There were few correlations between
any of the predator–urchin–kelp variables, except a positive relationship between urchin
commercial landings and kelp canopy cover, a reflection of fishing practices and the
reliance of urchin gonad condition on adequate kelp. They concluded that declines in
some coastal kelp forest sites around major cities were caused primarily by degradation
of water quality, increased sedimentation and contamination, and unfavorable oceanographic conditions, rather than by trophic cascades.
Further afield in Tasmania, the case for lobsters generating a trophic cascade is relatively strong, and yet Craig Johnson and colleagues have been sparing in their use of the
term. Instead, they have marshaled considerable evidence that overfishing of lobsters
has reduced the resilience of kelp beds to climatic and oceanographic changes, and how
this has led to a “catastrophic phase shift” to widespread urchin barrens (Ling et al.
2009). From a series of experiments, they estimated that the minimum size of lobsters
capable of preying on Centrostephanus rodgersii individuals in natural conditions was
around 140 mm carapace length (figure 9.1). Survival of tagged urchins was much
higher where lobsters were fished compared to areas where fishing was not allowed.
Their analyses of catch data showed that it was the large lobsters, those capable of eating urchins, that were mostly eliminated by the fishery. Despite these mechanisms and
effects, Ling et al. (2009) pointed out that the majority of reefs in the region remained
kelp dominated, but argued their resilience is low because effective predators are relatively rare. Furthermore, as discussed earlier (Chapter 7), it was several processes and
nonlinear responses working in concert that produced these changes, including the
inshore movement of the East Australian Current, warming water and larval drift enabling C. rodgersii larvae to survive and drift down from warmer northern waters, a
general decline in abundance of Macrocystis due initially most likely to warming and low
nutrients over several decades, and the rise of the lobster fishery. Johnson and colleagues
(e.g., Johnson et al. 2005, 2011, Ling et al. 2009) have very firmly put their arguments
into a resilience-based ecosystem management approach. They argue this conceptual
shift away from “traditional equilibrium-based thinking of top-down predation-driven
vs. bottom-up environmentally driven control” is both necessary and urgent in the face
of high levels of predator removal and a rapidly warming climate.

PREDATION AND TROPHIC CASCADES IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

205

Sea urchin survival
(% population remaining)

A.

100

Fished

75

50

MPA
25
0

50

100

150

200

Days
B.

Catch rate
(no. trap lift¯¹)

0.20

1990s; 844 trap lifts = 1881 lobsters
1960s; 813 trap lifts = 4692 lobsters

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200

Lobster CL (mm)
figure 9.1
Effects of lobster (Jasus edwardsii) predation on sea urchins (C. rodgersii) in Tasmania. (A) Population
trajectories of tagged C. rodgersii on reefs inside and outside marine protected areas (i.e., ±fishing);
data are mean percentages (±1 standard error) of sea urchins surviving (initial n = 96 at each site).
(B) Change in size-frequency distribution of lobsters before (1960s) and after intensive fishing
(1990s) in northeastern Tasmania, showing the reduction in carapace length (CL) of lobsters. Lobsters must be around 140 mm CL to be effective predators of emergent sea urchins in the wild.
sources: Data from Frusher (1997) and Ling et al. (2009).

S E A OT TE R S AND PR E DATI O N ON GR A Z E R S

The sea otter Enhydra lutris is the poster pinup of a keystone species. Publications on
this species number in the hundreds, and citations relating to its effects on kelp-dominated coastal ecosystems in the thousands. The vast majority of this literature has been
generated since 1985, when a discussion of otter effects on kelp communities could be
relatively brief (Foster and Schiel 1985). What has changed since then is not only the
“quest for keystone species” (cf. Power et al. 1996) that may be the lynchpins of trophic
structure and ecosystem function, but also an awareness generally that the exploitation
of top predators is taking a toll on many ecosystems worldwide. In this case, the poster
pinup has mostly a deserved reputation. It appears to be cute and cuddly but lives up to

206

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

its billing of being a dominant predator and having a wide-scale influence on the kelp
systems it inhabits.
Sea otters are voracious consumers, especially of invertebrates, including sea urchins
and abalone, and can severely reduce prey numbers. This was seen, for example, in the
Monterey California region where there were enormous populations of large abalone,
Haliotis rufecens, through the 1940s, and those that were not fished commercially or in
cracks and crevices inaccessible to otters were quickly removed once otters reappeared
in the region (McLean 1962). Nevertheless, their effects are not without controversy,
especially as they relate to Macrocystis forests (vanBlaricom and Estes 1988). Sea otters
are roving predators and their effects on large grazing invertebrates and kelp systems
can sometimes take years to manifest themselves completely when new areas are inhabited (Lowry and Pearse 1973) and can be patchy (Watanabe and Harrold 1991). The
controversy, however, relates more to putative historical effects of aboriginal and commercial exploitation that hunted otters to near extinction in the 1800s (described by
Kenyon 1969) “with the attendant collapse of kelp forests grazed away by sea urchins
released from sea otter predation” (Jackson et al. 2001). The corollary of this claim of
collapse is that kelp forests where otters have not been present for considerable periods
of time should be overgrazed by sea urchins and have little kelp. This is the case in many
areas of the Aleutian Islands, where the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis
forms barrens that dominate nearshore rocky reefs down to where otters do not forage
and the virtual elimination of all large sea urchins where otters are present (Estes and
Palmisano 1974, Estes et al. 1978, Estes and Duggins 1995). In California, in areas
where otters had not been present since at least the early 20th century, however, only
about 10% of the 224 giant kelp forest sites surveyed were deforested, and urchins were
patchy within the other 90% of sites (Foster and Schiel 1988; figure 9.2). Clearly, there
are numerous factors involved in determining the relative importance of dominant
predators on grazers, including the relative influence of abiotic factors and disturbances
on the standing stock of kelp and production of detrital material (Reed et al. 2011), the
recruitment dynamics of sea urchins (Flowers et al. 2002), the species composition,
and possibly the diversity of the system (e.g., Byrnes et al. 2006, Graham, Vásquez,
et al. 2007).
Enactment of protective legislation for otters in 1911 was instrumental in the recovery
of its populations. Before commercial exploitation, the range of sea otters extended in
a continuous arc from the northern islands of Japan, along the Kamchatka coastline,
across the Aleutian Islands chain, and southward along the west coast of North America
into Baja California, Mexico (Kenyon 1969). The population southeast of the Aleutian
chain was believed to be extinct, at least by the scientific community, until the discovery
in 1938 of a raft of 50–90 individuals along an isolated stretch of coastline in central
California (Bolin 1938, Woodhouse et al. 1977). After legal protection came into effect,
the range of otters extended at the rate of approximately 4 km annually, with a total
population increase of 5% per year through at least the 1970s (Wild and Ames 1974).

PREDATION AND TROPHIC CASCADES IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

2 07

Multifactor Effects
Interactive View

Deforested

60

Completely
Forested

# Sites

100

20

A

B

C

D

E

Site Categories
In Areas
Without Otters

+ Otters

– Otters

Single Factor
Hierarchical View
figure 9.2
Categorization of sites in California without sea otters up to 1984.
Site categories:
(A) completely forested by giant kelp with no large sea urchins
(B) kelp dominated with sea urchins interspersed in crevices
(C) kelp present and abundant, but with patches of 1–3 m diameter

dominated by sea urchins
(D) kelp present in patches, but with large patches (20–50 m diameter)

dominated by sea urchins
(E) sea urchin ‘barrens’ dominated by sea urchins with no kelp. See text for

more explanation
source: From Foster and Schiel (1988).

Sea otters currently occupy around 500 km of the California coastline from around
Halfmoon Bay (just south of San Francisco) to around Gaviota (just southeast of Point
Conception in southern California; Estes et al. 2003, Hatfield and Tinker 2012). The
California population totals around 2700 otters, with slightly expanding numbers in
the north and slightly declining numbers in the south portions of this range. The central area around Monterey, the source of the recolonization of otters in California, has
had relatively stable numbers of around 1600 otters since at least 1990 (Hatfield and

208

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

Tinker 2012). There have been several successful translocations of otters into areas of
their ancestral range such as southeast Alaska, Vancouver Island, Canada (Watson and
Estes 2011), Washington state, and San Nicolas Island, off southern California (Estes
and Harrold 1988).
The preferred habitat of otters in California is a lush kelp canopy in proximity to rocky
substrata with deep crevices (Woodhouse et al. 1977). Kelp forests dampen wave action,
creating areas of calm that serve as otter refuges from winter storms. The forests may also
serve as protection from predators such as white sharks. Otters gradually move out into the
offshore kelp canopies as these re-form in spring and summer. The diet of sea otters in kelp
forests consists of epibenthic invertebrates commonly associated with low intertidal and
subtidal rocky substrata with deep crevices (e.g., sea urchins, abalone), and with kelp fronds
(e.g., Tegula spp., kelp crabs; Woodhouse et al. 1977, Estes et al. 1982). Otters can forage
as deep as 40 m, securing their prey with their forepaws, and returning to the surface to
eat (Kenyon 1969). California sea otters display a unique type of tool-using behavior when
feeding on hard-shelled invertebrates: food items may be pounded against a rock held on
the otter’s chest while floating at the sea surface (Fisher 1939). Houk and Geibel (1974)
described an incident of tool use by a sea otter pounding an attached abalone with a rock.
Numerous studies have recorded that otters colonizing kelp forests in central California prey preferentially on red sea urchins and abalone (Boolootian 1961, Ebert 1968,
Benech 1980, Ostfeld 1982). In a colonizing group of otters in a Macrocystis forests off
Point Santa Cruz, California, red sea urchins were initially the major prey item (Ostfeld
1982). Kelp crabs and clams replaced urchins as urchins became scarce. Abalone and
cancer crabs were consistently exploited as dietary items at relatively low levels. Other
prey items on rocky substrata include snails, mussels, octopus, chitons, tubeworms,
limpets, barnacles, scallops, and starfish (Ebert 1968, Wild and Ames 1974, Shimek
1977, Woodhouse et al. 1977, Estes et al. 1982). VanWagenen et al. (1981) saw sea otters
preying on seabirds. Otters are able to adapt to diverse environments (Woodhouse et
al. 1977) and readily shift their diets as different prey items become available (Tinker et
al. 2008). The spreading fronts of the California population of otters have successfully
occupied sandy and silty bottoms in the coastal zone, exploiting Pismo clams, gaper
clams, razor clams, mole crabs, and even echiuroid “worms” as prey (Wild and Ames
1974, Stephenson 1977, Hines and Loughlin 1980). They also inhabit bays and sloughs;
one of the largest concentrations of sea otters in California is now in Elkhorn Slough
where they have a profound positive effect on eelgrass (Hughes et al. 2013). This occurs
because otters consume crabs, which releases grazing species from predation pressure.
The grazers eat eelgrass epiphytes, which have increased due to eutrophication from
agriculture. The reduction of epiphytes and consequent increase in light allows eelgrass
to become more productive. Outside of the protection of kelp canopies and shallow
inlets, sea otters are susceptible to attacks by great white sharks (Ames and Morejohn
1980). Other than man and parasites, this shark is its only known predator in California
waters, although orcas eat otters in Alaskan waters (Estes et al. 1998).

PREDATION AND TROPHIC CASCADES IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

209

Otters exert their large effects on invertebrate populations both by force of numbers and
by satisfying their high energetic demand. Costa (1978) calculated that an average-sized
otter must consume 20–25% of its body weight daily to meet its energy needs. Yeates et
al. (2007) were the first to measure the energetic coasts of individual dives and metabolic
rates from prolonged foraging sessions. They did a series of large tank experiments and
radio tagging of wild animals, recording over 2000 foraging dives. They found that otters
dive for up to 4 min, with an average dive of 1 min. The highest metabolic rates were after
a foraging dive. Their metabolic rate was similar regardless of what prey they caught.
Several features of otters contribute to their high energy demands. Otters, unlike other
marine mammals, lack blubber and insulate themselves by trapping air against their skin
with very dense fur (Williams et al. 1992). This insulation compresses with depth and
the thermal energetic costs must be met by increasing food (Costa and Kooyman 1984).
Air trapping and large lungs (Tarasoff and Kooyman 1973) make the animal buoyant.
Yeates et al. (2007), in their fascinating study, concluded that otters have an energetically
challenging existence because of their small size, exceptional buoyancy, and costly style of
swimming, which are counterbalanced by them spending about half of their day resting.
The effects of otters in kelp forests are best known in central California, where it is
now rare to find urchins other than in low densities in cracks and crevices apparently
inaccessible to otters, a finding corroborated in numerous studies (e.g., McLean 1962,
Lowry and Pearse 1973, Riedman and Estes 1988, Reed et al. 2011). Predation by otters is
far from the only source of mortality of sea urchins in giant kelp forests with otters (e.g.,
Pearse and Hines 1977, 1979, Watanabe and Harrold 1991), but few larger urchins are
able to survive for long outside of protective subhabitats. The clearest perspective on the
effects of grazing, predation, and abiotic factors in the production of giant kelp forests
of California is provided by Reed et al. (2011). They pointed out that the interplay and
relative influences of top-down (predators), bottom-up (nutrients), and environmental
forcing (wave disturbance) in central and southern California Macrocystis forests are
mediated to some extent by the very low densities of urchins in central California due
to predation by otters. Red and purple urchin densities averaged over 10 years at nine
sites in southern California were 7.1 m−2 compared to 0.06 m−2 at eight sites in central
California. The southern California sites showed considerable variation, up to 30-fold,
in urchin densities among sites and years. Despite these differences in grazing and topdown control due to otters in central California, however, Reed et al. (2011) showed that
net primary production (NPP) was consistently lower in central California, not greater as
would be predicted by the absence of urchins, because of the intense wave disturbances
that overwhelmed top-down and bottom-up processes. In both central and southern California, net primary production was best explained by interregional variability in wave
disturbances. This is because the massive growth form of Macrocystis and its canopy on
the sea surface creates considerable drag during storms and is susceptible to removal.
Reed et al. (2011) noted, however, that the understory of perennial kelps may partially
compensate for the loss of production of Macrocystis, but cannot compensate for its role

21 0

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

as a foundation species. Furthermore, even though otters were absent from most kelp
forests in southern California, the NPP of giant kelp in their southern sites was twice
that of central California sites, despite seasonal nutrient limitation, strong localized
grazing pressure, and some sites being repeatedly deforested over the years of the study.
The historical evidence for the effects of sea otters is interesting and suggestive, although
not entirely conclusive. Simenstad et al. (1978) examined evidence from Aleut middens in
the Aleutian Islands and concluded that alternate stable states existed in nearshore communities. They argued that the strata containing large quantities of sea urchin and limpet
shells coincided with the absence of otters, due to hunting by Aleuts. The presence of fish
remains coincided with times when otters were present, and macroalgae predominated.
There is also evidence in the middens in Monterey (Gordon 1974) and on San Nicolas
Island, off southern California, that prehistoric people hunted sea otters. Tegner and Dayton (2000) pointed out the large numbers of abalone shells seen on the Channel Islands,
suggesting that aboriginal man had a significant impact on the nearshore community. A
few studies have reviewed historical evidence and attempted to decipher temporal trends
in middens to shed light on the use of shellfish populations and the possible effects of sea
otters (Estes and Van Blaricom 1985, Erlandson et al. 2005, 2008). Erlandson et al. (2005),
for example, found on San Miguel Island, 42 km off the coast of southern California that
native Americans apparently coexisted with sea otters and productive shellfish populations
for over 9000 years. They argued that based on modern knowledge of sea otter behavior
and ecology, the domination in middens by large red abalone, H. rufescens, between 7300
and 3300 years ago was only likely if otters had been reduced by hunting or other causes
because “an abundance of large abalone accessible to human foragers is fundamentally
incompatible with the presence of significant numbers of sea otters.” They speculated it
was possible that native Americans intentionally controlled otter populations to enhance
local productivity of fish and shellfish for harvesting. Erlandson et al. (2008) pointed out
that some of the variation in sizes of shellfish in middens may have been the result of
variation in water temperature, marine productivity, or other natural cycles, as well as an
increase in the human population during the last 1000 years. An alternative explanation
is that human foraging was not as intense as assumed, due to either small and / or variable human population sizes or the inability of humans to forage across all of the habitats
occupied by shellfish. For example, many invertebrate species probably had a depth refuge
because humans could not effectively forage below a few meters.
These historical reconstructions are interesting and relevant to understanding a
broader perspective of human interactions with the marine environment, their reliance
on sustenance from it, and the potential for local-scale impacts. As is the nature of most
of this type of evidence, however, it is suggestive but inconclusive. The accumulating
evidence is that the large-scale removal of sea otters from around the mid-1700s onward
allowed urchins and abalone to increase in many areas (Erlandson et al. 2008). There
also seems to be a general recognition that the diverse and complex giant kelp ecosystem
of California provided considerably more buffering of predatory effects of otters so that

PREDATION AND TROPHIC CASCADES IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

211

they did not undergo the large changes seen in some Alaskan sites (Erlandson et al.
2005, Graham, Vásquez, et al. 2007, Foster and Schiel 2010).

OTHE R PR E DATO R S

The relatively high diversity and great biomass of giant kelp forests ensure there are
multiple pathways for algal material to work its way through the trophic levels. Prominent predators of grazers and detritivores (not discussed in other sections here) are
sea stars, crabs, whelks, octopi, harbor seals, and birds. The large sun star Pycnopodia
helianthoides, for example, is an active forager in kelp forests along the west coast of
North America, feeding on sea urchins, abalone, snails, and other sea stars (Moitoza
and Phillips 1979, Duggins 1983, Watanabe 1984a, Harrold and Pearse 1987, Pearse and
Hines 1987, Byrnes et al. 2006). Large Kellet’s whelks (Kelletia kelletii) feed on a wide
range of snails and other invertebrates. Octopi are highly mobile predators capable of
squeezing into cracks and crevices, and feeding on snails, crabs, abalone, and other prey
on the forest floor (e.g., Ambrose 1986). Further afield, a study in a Macrocystis stand
in Tierra del Fuego in the Straits of Magellan showed that gulls could be an important
high trophic level predator. Hockey (1988) found that the sea gull Larus dominicanus
fed almost exclusively on small epifaunal bivalves, Gaimardia sp., on the floating fronds
and upper stipes of giant kelp, consuming about 300 individuals per square meter daily.
None of these predators of grazing invertebrates appears to exert more than smallscale, highly localized effects within a kelp forest. In combination, however, there may
be synergistic interactions among predators. Byrnes et al. (2006), for example, found
in field surveys that as predator diversity increased, the number of herbivores decreased
and kelp abundance increased. The importance of sea star predation to giant kelp community structure may be further elucidated as a result of the massive die-off of numerous sea star species at many sites in the Northeast Pacific, first observed in June 2013
(Stokstad 2014). The cause of the die-off and its ecological consequences are yet to be
determined.

Any discussion of the role of predators in kelp forest biology is bound to generate lively
debate in scientific circles. It is easy to find numerous examples of places and situations
where grazers, especially sea urchins, have had a large impact. It is unequivocal that the
sea otter Enhydra lutris can control urchin populations, but the evidence becomes more
diff use and patchy when it involves fish and lobsters. There are also numerous cases
of snails and other invertebrates having localized impacts on giant kelp, particularly in
ENSO years with large storms and low nutrients. The major question is how to separate
the phenomenological from underlying mechanisms.
Essentially, there are two (mostly divergent) models of kelp forest structure, one
involving trophic cascades and one involving multiple processes acting on kelp, sea

212

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

A. Trophic effects model

Intense
Overfishing

B. Multi-effects model

No Fishing
(e.g., MPAs)

• Diseases
• Poor recruitment
• Reduced fishing
• Urchin harvesting

• Episodic recruitment
• Fished key predators
• Urchin longevity

Grazers
regulated by
predation

Grazers
“released”
from control

Few urchins,
Creviceoriented

Sea urchin
patches
come and go

Sea urchins
abundant in
patches

Kelp-dominated
stands, diverse,
high complexity

Urchin
“Barrens”
Corallines
low
complexity

“Alternate states”
“Phase shift”

Continuum of
urchin–kelp domination
of patches

• Sediments
• Excessive wave
forces
• Organic pollution
• Low nutrients

• High nutrients
• Reduced
stressors
• Connectivity
• Species’
demography

figure 9.3
Conceptual models of dominant structuring processes of kelp beds. (A) Trophic cascades leading to different
phases and (B) multi-effects model of a continuum of urchin to algal dominated patches (see text for explanations).
Widths of arrows indicate strength of interaction effect. See also figure 6.5.
source: From Schiel (2013).

urchins, and predators (figure 9.3). In some conclusions of generality of predator control
and “relaxation” of such control there is a logical flaw. Just because extensive grazing
or significant predation effects on benthic grazers occur in most kelp forests of the
world does not imply or mean they are generally of great magnitude or pervasive in
space and time. For example, Reed et al. (2011) showed that urchin grazing is far more
important in southern California, where there are no otters, than in central California,
where otters are numerous, and yet kelp forests are abundant and functionally intact in
both regions, largely responding to oceanographic conditions. Foster and Schiel (1988)

PREDATION AND TROPHIC CASCADES IN KELP COMMUNITIES

•

213

calculated that around 10% of sites in southern California were dominated by urchins.
In all cases where giant kelp occurs, it has thrived and its associated communities are
functional, and not in a “collapsed” state from overfishing, except where topography
and coastal sediment have been permanently altered. Interaction strengths vary, often
depending on oceanic basin-wide conditions affecting kelp growth, survival, provision
of detached drift material, and local-scale density-dependent effects of kelp. Even the
severe case of overgrazing and overfishing in Tasmanian waters has several caveats,
including the action of a current, transport of a warm-water urchin from the north, and
long-term warming trends in SST.
Whether or not effects constitute a “trophic cascade” in kelp forests is only partially
semantics. In many ways, overuse of this term trivializes most of the relevant processes
in kelp forest ecosystems. Graham, Vásquez, et al. (2007) highlighted three features
that buffer giant kelp forests from overexploitation of predators. All Macrocystis-based
food webs are diverse, they are embedded within high-productivity oceanographic systems where production may simply override consumption, and the recruitment of sea
urchins, the dominant grazer, tends to be highly variable in space and time. As discussed earlier (Part I), Macrocystis is also highly responsive to its environment in ways
not found in terrestrial ecosystems. It is almost inevitable that we compare giant kelp,
as a prominent foundation species in coastal waters, with terrestrial trees and forests.
One of the many important ways they differ (cf. Carr et al. 2003), however, is that Macrocystis has a weedy life history, grows fast, does not usually live long, and an entire
forest can regenerate quickly. It lends itself admirably to the physically and biologically
dynamic waters in which it thrives. Predation and grazing can be important, and locally
comprehensive, but they are just two of the numerous factors affecting the world’s giant
kelp forests.

214

•

THE GIANT KELP ECOSYSTEM

PART III

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT,
AND CONSERVATION

This page intentionally left blank

10
ANTHROPOGENIC EFFECTS
ON KELP FORESTS
Coincident with the increased discharge of sewage effluent,
harvestable kelp has virtually disappeared in the vicinity of Whites Point
for a distance of two or three miles along the coast.
—Revelle and Wheelock (1954)

Because giant kelp forests occur near the shore, they are immediately subjected to runoff and waste discharge from land. They can also be affected by shoreline modifications
that result in loss of rocky habitat, increased turbidity, and changes in sediment distribution. Boat traffic and anchoring can thin canopies and remove entire plants, and be
vectors for introducing non-native species. Shipping and oil extraction accidents can
bathe the forest in petroleum products. Harvesting for food and chemicals removes
Macrocystis and associated organisms. Of course, forests are also embedded in the larger
ocean which is changing as a result of human activities. There are clearly ample opportunities for multiple, human-induced impacts on giant kelp forests, and all the above
have occurred primarily along the densely populated shores of southern California.
The effects related to ocean discharges, land use, boat traffic, toxic spills, giant kelp
harvesting, and introduced species are considered below; fishing effects are discussed
in Chapter 11 and climate-related changes in Chapter 13.
There are many anthropogenic effects on water quality and benthic habitats that
negatively affect giant kelp growth and reproduction. Given the biological and physiological constraints on growth and reproduction reviewed in Chapters 2 and 3, it should
be no surprise that activities that increase sedimentation, reduce light, and increase
turbidity and temperature (if near upper thermal limit) will probably cause Macrocystis
to decline. Although much of current coastal management is focused on sustaining and
improving finfish and shellfish populations with marine protected areas (Chapter 12),
maintenance of water and benthic quality is both fundamental and critical to ensure

21 7

that diverse and productive forests persist (Schiel and Foster 1992). This can only be
achieved through proper management of waste discharges and runoff.

S E WAGE AND IND U S TR IAL WA S TE D I S CHAR GE

The largest impacts of sewage discharge on giant kelp forests occurred from the 1940s
through the early 1960s in southern California, coincident with rapidly increasing
urbanization and industrialization (Foster and Schiel 2010). During this time the giant
kelp forest at Palos Verdes adjacent to the Whites Point sewer outfall near Los Angeles
declined from 12 km2 to near zero, and the forest at Point Loma near San Diego from
6 km2 to near zero (figure 10.1). The small remnants remaining by 1957 were further
reduced by the 1957–1959 El Niño. These losses have also been attributed to increases in
sea urchin abundance related to declines in populations of sea urchin predators due to
fishing (e.g., Jackson et al. 2001), but sea urchin grazing became important only after the
forests were reduced and urchins began to graze actively on the few remaining stands.
Both forests recovered with increased regulation of sewage sources (source controls)
and improved sewage treatment (figure 10.1), and when new construction extended the
outfalls further offshore. These improvements also contributed to reduced sediment
toxicity (Swartz et al. 1986, James et al. 1990). However, while the Point Loma forest
has occasionally recovered to near its former size, the forest at Palos Verdes has not.
Recovery may be inhibited by the continued discharge of high nutrient sewage effluent
that may increase turbidity by stimulating phytoplankton growth; nitrogen inputs from
sewage can exceed those from natural upwelling around large sewage outfalls (Howard
et al. 2014). It may also be inhibited by runoff and sediment resuspension (Conversi and
McGowan 1994) and the legacy of rocky habitat buried by sediment. The large-scale and
long-lasting effects of these early discharges in southern California are in contrast to
those that occurred in the Point Loma kelp forest from a broken outfall pipe. The break
occurred in 1992, lasted 2 months, and released 7.1× 108 L −1 of treated effluent into the
kelp forest. Increased ammonia concentrations and reduced light inhibited germination
and growth of outplanted giant kelp microscopic stages, but these and other effects disappeared soon after the pipe was repaired, and the spill appeared to have no long-lasting
effects on the community (Tegner et al. “Effects of a large” 1995).
The many potential waste materials in sewage effluent and their interactive effects
make it difficult to determine which may be most important. Sewer effluent can contain a complex mix of potentially harmful materials, but the high, inverse correlation
between canopy size and emissions of suspended solids (figure 3.1) and the accumulation of sediment associated with the outfall at Palos Verdes (Grigg and Kiwala 1970)
suggest the most important effects are on microscopic stages and small juvenile sporophytes whose survival and reproduction is inhibited by light reduction, scour, and
burial (see Chapter 3) as well as by toxic materials sorbed to particulate organic matter (James et al. 1990). The more advanced sewage treatment currently used removes

21 8

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

20
18

Canopy area (km2)

16
14

Palos Verdes

12

Point Loma

10
8
6
4
2
0
1900

1920

1940
1

2

1960

1980

3

5

4

2000

2020

figure 10.1
Sea-surface canopy areas of giant kelp (in square kilometers) at Palos Verdes and Point Loma
kelp forests.
Events indicated by arrows: 1 = installation of shallow sewage outfall at Palos Verdes; 2 = sediment discharge from Mission Bay and sewage discharge from San Diego Bay at Point Loma;
3 = 1957–1959 El Niño; 4 = sewage discharge moved offshore at Point Loma; 5 = beginning of
advanced sewage treatment at Palos Verdes and sea urchin fishery in southern California.
note: Canopy variation after 1980 was primarily related to variation in oceanographic conditions
and storms.
source: Modified from Foster and Schiel (2010), based on data in MBC (2013).

suspended solids but, depending on the level of treatment, nutrients may remain that
reduce benthic light by stimulating phytoplankton growth, a problem that is reduced by
moving outfalls offshore into deeper water (Conversi and McGowan 1994). As argued
by Connell (2007) and Gorman et al. (2009) for kelp beds (Ecklonia radiata) in South
Australia, excess nutrients may also encourage the growth of algal turfs that directly
and indirectly (by accumulating sediment) inhibit recruitment of kelp and various large
fucoids. Turf-sediment matrices have also been implicated in preventing recolonization
of native algal species in Tasmanian kelp communities (Valentine and Johnson 2005).
Ammonia can be toxic (Tegner et al. 1995—“Effects of a large sewage spill”), and domestic sewage can contain toxic metals and organic compounds that may be increased if the
discharge also contains industrial wastes.
Offshore oil production produces very large waste streams of so-called “producedwaters” that can contain hydrocarbons, heavy metals, and other potentially toxic substances. Depending on the location of a discharge, this waste could affect kelp forests. Reed
et al. (1994) used a combination of adult giant kelp transplants and outplanted zoospores,
as well as laboratory toxicity tests, to evaluate the effects of a large (2.64 × 106 L day−1)
produced-water discharge near Carpinteria, California. Diffusers on the discharge pipe

ANTHROPOGENIC EFFECTS ON KELP FORESTS

•

219

diluted the wastes to 1% within 5 m, and the field experiments indicated discharge effects
were probably limited to within 50 m of the outfall. Other studies at the same site indicated
that effects on invertebrate reproduction and larvae extended to 100 m or more from the
outfall (review in Reed et al. 1994).
Since the 1960s, regulation by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
through the Clean Water Act and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(www.cfpub.epa.gov/npdes) permitting process has led to the elimination of many discharges and improved treatment standards for those that remain. These improvements
in the United States and elsewhere (e.g., Australia; Burridge and Bidwell 2002) have
been informed by laboratory bioassays that expose life stages of organisms living in kelp
forests, including giant kelp (Anderson and Hunt 1988), to variously treated effluent or
particular toxins in the effluent, such as copper (Anderson et al. 1990). These assays can
be used in conjunction with chemical analyses of effluent to determine potential toxicity. If the standards are exceeded, enforcement is supposed to bring the treatment plant
into compliance. This path of regulation from the laboratory to enforcement may not
always be reliable but in other than extreme cases, assessing effects by field sampling
is difficult. Outplanting methods pioneered by Deysher and Dean (1986a) and applied
to discharges of sewage (e.g., Tegner et al. 1995—“Effects of a large sewage spill”) and
produced waters (e.g., Reed et al. 1994) are an excellent alternative for determining the
direct effects on macroalgae in the field. Of course the best solution, particularly given
the growing shortage of clean freshwater, is not to discharge sewage wastes into the
ocean at all but remove the wastes and nutrients and reuse the water. Depending on the
nature of the wastes and the location and size of the outfall this may not be currently feasible or necessary, or may require trade-offs such as increased use of fossil fuel to power
the recycling. In such cases it is precautionary to reduce the wastes as much as feasible
and discharge the effluent into an environment where effects are minimized. Recent
advances in floating bioreactor technology suggest treatment may eventually be feasible
by using nutrients and water in wastes to produce biofuels (e.g., Trent et al. 2012).

R UNO FF AND COA S TAL MO D IFI C ATI ON

Materials from land also enter coastal waters via runoff in natural waterways and storm
drains. Landslides stimulated by coastal construction can directly introduce sediment
(e.g., Konar and Roberts 1996) but are relatively rare and localized. Runoff is widespread and increasing, however, as coastlines worldwide become more urbanized and
industrialized, and catchment land is converted to farms and ranches. Runoff most
commonly includes sediment which, like suspended particulates in sewage effluents,
can have large effects on kelp and other subtidal and intertidal reef habitats (review in
Airoldi 2003). Extensive storm drain monitoring programs in the United States and
elsewhere have documented numerous other constituents similar to those found in
sewage effluent, including nitrates, phosphates, biocides, and heavy metals (review in

220

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

Maestre and Pitt 2005). The concentrations and amounts vary widely depending on
catchment type and area, and this plus variation in volume, flow frequency, and amount
of ocean mixing influence their effects in the ocean (e.g., Cox and Foster 2013). Moreover, unlike point source discharges such as sewers, storm drains are numerous and
other sources of runoff are diff use, making it difficult to attribute effects to a particular
source. Nevertheless, there is considerable correlative evidence from around the world
that runoff is degrading nearshore environments. Partial solutions have been obtained
using upstream sediment basins, by directing flow through vegetated areas prior to
discharge, and by better land-use planning and source control.
Coastal construction has the potential to degrade or eliminate kelp forests. Examples
include dredging and breakwater construction for harbors and marinas, both of which
probably contributed to kelp forest declines in southern California by eliminating habitat and increasing turbidity and sedimentation (Foster and Schiel 2010). Breakwaters
are hard substrata that may be colonized by giant kelp, partially compensating for loss
of natural habitat. Great impacts from sedimentation have been seen, for example, along
the Baltic coast where increased sedimentation and turbidity have combined to reduce
the depth of canopy-forming algae and impair their recruitment dynamics (Airoldi
2003, Schiel 2009). Upstream dams may reduce sediment transport but can have the
unintended consequence of starving beaches of sand, leading to increased cliff erosion
by waves (Bascom 1964). These and more subtle effects such as changes in current and
wave patterns due to breakwater and groyne construction are, as yet, poorly documented
for giant kelp forests; they are often difficult to detect in the midst of other changes such
as sewage discharge and increasing runoff.

INTA KE S AND D I S CHAR GE S FR OM P OWE R
AND D E S A LINATI ON PL ANT S

Seawater is widely used to cool coastal power plants (called “once-through cooling”)
and growing shortages of freshwater have led to construction of desalination plants that
produce freshwater from seawater. If seawater is withdrawn directly from the ocean,
organisms in the water can cause fouling and clogging within the plant. Large mesh
screens on the intake reduce these problems but, depending on intake velocity, can
impinge and kill large organisms. Smaller organisms are entrained through the screens
and into the plant where they are damaged or killed (figure 10.2). The discharge from
power plants can exceed 20°C above ambient (Langford 1990) and the salinity of the
brine discharged from desalination plants can be 75‰, or about twice ambient levels
(Roberts et al. 2010). Depending on the amount of water affected, and devices and
procedures used to reduce intake and discharge effects, power and desalination plants
located near kelp forests can cause forest degradation.
Two nuclear power plants, the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS) in
southern California and the Diablo Canyon Power Plant (DCPP) in central California,

ANTHROPOGENIC EFFECTS ON KELP FORESTS

•

2 21

+ 20ºF
above
ambient
Heated water discarded back to ocean

Fish and
other
organisms
ENTRAINED
with ocean
water

Power Plant
Heating and
turbulance kills
small organisms
and young life
stages such as
eggs, larvae,
and spores.

Screens IMPINGE
organisms larger
than around 1 cm
Impinged organisms
die and are removed
figure 10.2
A typical once-through cooling system for a coastal power plant. Screen mesh size and discharge
temperatures vary among plants. Desalination plants with surface seawater intakes are similar except
entrainment mortality is primarily from turbulence and fi ltration, discharge temperatures are only
slightly elevated above ambient levels, and the salinity of the discharge water (brine water) is typically
twice that of the ambient water. Rapid dilution of heated and brine water to near-ambient temperatures and salinities can be achieved with diff users on the end of the discharge pipe (see text).

are located near giant kelp forests and their intake and discharge effects have been
extensively studied. Study results and regulatory actions are published primarily in
reports by various state regulatory agencies. Some of these are cited below and can
be obtained through the agency websites. DCPP uses over 8 billion liters of cooling
water per day (York and Foster 2005). SONGS used a similar amount but there has
been a recent large reduction in volume because the plant is no longer used to generate
electricity. SONGS has a fish return system to reduce impingement, and discharges
water through multi-port diff users in the shallow subtidal zone. DCPP does not have a
fish return system and discharges directly into the intertidal zone of a small bay. The
amount of entrainment of organisms by the SONGS intake has been determined but
the amount of habitat needed to mitigate for entrainment losses has not been assessed.
The loss of organisms due to entrainment at DCPP has also been determined, and
effects on rocky habitat estimated using “Habitat (= Area) of Production Foregone,”

222

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

a model that determines the amount of habitat needed to replace the organisms lost
(Strange et al. 2004). Using this method, the amount of kelp forest habitat required to
produce the organisms entrained by DCPP was estimated to be 85–200 ha (Raimondi
et al. 2005).
The diff users on the discharge at SONGS cause rapid dilution of the discharged
water to minimize thermal effects. However, the intake is in shallower, more turbid
water than the discharge, and turbidity is further increased around the discharge by the
entrainment of a large volume of water to reduce discharge temperatures rapidly. These
increase overall turbidity and sediment that affect the kelp forest (Murdoch et al. 1989).
An artificial reef has been constructed to mitigate the loss (discussed in Chapter 11).
Elevated temperatures from the discharge at DCPP have caused comprehensive changes
in the intertidal and subtidal biota of the cove (Schiel et al. 2004) including a change in
surface canopy from bull kelp (Nereocystis luetkeana) to giant kelp. Neither entrainment
nor thermal effects have yet to be mitigated for at DCPP.
To our knowledge there are no desalination plants currently operating near giant kelp
forests so effects in the field are unknown. If intakes are located in the water column,
they have the potential to impinge and entrain organisms, although the impacts would
most likely be less than those of power plants because desalination plants, at least those
planned for California, will use much less water. Roberts et al. (2010) reviewed toxicological studies and the environmental effects of existing desalination plants elsewhere
and concluded that the impacts of hypersaline discharges are commonly confined to
within tens of meters of discharges unless the discharge is located in an area of limited
circulation and mixing. In most cases there has been little damage if salinity is reduced
to 3–4‰ above ambient. Entrainment may be reduced by using very fine mesh screens
that exclude larger larvae, and eliminated by withdrawing water from beach wells or
using saline ground water. Discharge effects can be reduced by the use of diff users.
They can also be reduced by increasing intake volumes and using the excess, unprocessed seawater to dilute the brine before it is discharged. This will reduce discharge
impacts but increase those from entrainment at the intake.
New federal regulations make it doubtful that more once-through cooled power
plants will be constructed in the Unites States, and California is requiring all such existing plants in the state (nuclear plants may be an exception) either to eliminate ocean
impacts through the modification of existing cooling systems or to convert to cooling
towers or dry cooling (large radiators). If this trend continues worldwide, the direct
impacts of power plants will become minor. Indirect effects via CO2, soot, and other
emissions, however, may increase because, like advanced waste treatment, alternatives
to once-through cooling require more energy. Desalination plants can be designed to
minimize direct environmental impacts, but by potentially eliminating freshwater as a
constraint on coastal populations and development, they may increase waste discharge
and runoff. The trade-offs involved will no doubt be a matter of considerable debate if
coastal populations and their consumption of resources continue to increase.

ANTHROPOGENIC EFFECTS ON KELP FORESTS

•

2 23

B OAT TR AFFI C AND TOXI C S P ILL S

Powerboats motoring through kelp forests cut swaths through the surface canopy. Fortunately, small powerboats generally avoid the canopy because the fronds can foul propellers and clog cooling water intakes of engines. These are less of a problem for large
boats, the repeated passage of which can cause the reduction of giant kelp canopies in
the area traversed (M. Foster, pers. obs.). Sailboats usually avoid kelp canopies as fronds
foul the rudder and frond drag on the keel can stop a boat altogether. Boat anchors can
remove entire plants and scour the bottom but the difficulties of moving through a kelp
canopy and retrieving a fouled anchor encourage most boaters to anchor at the edges
of forests. Divers swimming through a kelp forest may remove plants and otherwise
disturb the bottom (Schaeffer et al. 1999). Coral reefs are more sensitive to anchoring
and diver disturbance and this has led to anchoring restrictions, use of mooring buoys,
and restrictions on diver equipment and behavior (e.g., http://www.cabopulmopark.com
/rules.html). We do not know of any such restrictions around giant kelp forests but they
may be expected in some areas if boating and diving increase.
Spills of various kinds of toxic materials occur in nearshore waters, but oil spills have
received the most attention because they occur more often, are unsightly, and stink.
Large spills can occur from underwater pipelines, tanker groundings, and “blowouts” at
offshore oil platforms (review in NRC 2003). To our knowledge, only two large oil spills
have affected giant kelp forests in recent history, the 1957 diesel oil spill from the wreck
of the tanker Tampico Maru in Baja California, Mexico, and the 1969 crude oil spill
from the blowout of Union Oil Platform A off the coast of Santa Barbara, California. The
Tampico Maru wrecked at the mouth of a small, shallow cove containing a stand of Macrocystis. As found in studies by North et al. (1964), the oil mixed into the entire water
column causing massive mortality of invertebrates including sea urchins and abalone.
Damage to seaweeds was less obvious. Vegetation in the cove, including juvenile giant
kelp, increased within 5 months of the spill and Macrocystis covered much of the cove
after 17 months. North and colleagues attributed the increased algal growth to a lack of
grazing. Most animals recovered by 1961, but sea urchins and abalone had not recovered
by the last sampling date in 1963, around 6 years after the spill.
Crude oil from the Santa Barbara spill polluted a large portion of the mainland coast
and many of the Channel Islands (Foster et al. 1971—“The Santa Barbara oil spill. I”).
Damage to kelp forests was reported by Foster et al. (1971—“The Santa Barbara oil spill.
II”) and overall damage by Foster and Holmes (1977). Assessment of spill effects was
complicated by the simultaneous occurrence of record storms and associated runoff.
Numerous sea birds were killed by contact with the oil, but other than a decline in
mysid shrimp, little damage to kelp forest algae, invertebrates, or fishes was observed
even though considerable quantities of oil fouled the surface canopies (figure 10.3).
The partially weathered crude oil appeared to stay on the surface of the water and did
not stick to the kelp fronds. Damage may have been more severe if the more volatile

224

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

B

A

figure 10.3
Aerial photo of the coast and nearshore kelp
forest, showing oil in a giant kelp canopy
near Santa Barbara, California, during
the 1969 Santa Barbara oil spill. The spill
was caused by a blowout on an offshore oil
platform.
A = oil streaming toward shore from the kelp
canopy; B = black area of oil on the beach. Scale
in meters.

0

150

source: Photo courtesy of Mark Hurd Aerial
Surveys.

components of the oil had not had time to evaporate prior to reaching shore, or if more
toxic, refined products were spilled and mixed into the water column as in the Tampico
spill. Dispersants are often used during oil spills. They can be toxic but their effects are
difficult to separate from those of the oil. Singer et al. (1995) tested the toxicity of Corexit
9554 on a suite of kelp forest organisms, including giant kelp zoospores, in laboratory
bioassays. Fifty percent of zoospores were killed at concentrations as low as 100 ppm
and abalone larvae were also very sensitive to the dispersant, suggesting impacts from
dispersants magnify those from the oil itself.

G I A NT K E L P H A R V E S TIN G

Giant kelp has been harvested for food, fertilizer, and chemicals since the early 1900s
(see Chapter 1) and the effects of harvesting continue to be investigated. In the early
days of harvesting in California when there was little regard for environmental effects,
groups of entire plants were removed by putting a cable around a stand and dragging it
onto a ship (McPeak and Glantz 1984). This method was soon replaced by kelp harvesting ships with large cutting devices on the stern (see Chapter 11). The most modern
ships backed through the surface canopy and the cutting device severed fronds in an
8 m wide swath, much like a hedge trimmer. A metal conveyor moved the severed
fronds onto the boat where they were distributed by a grab that could move up and
down the deck on an overhead cable. Regulations evolved to limit the cut to no more

ANTHROPOGENIC EFFECTS ON KELP FORESTS

•

2 25

than 1.2 m below the surface. Harvesters also had to specify how they would “avoid” cutting bull kelp, Nereocystis luetkeana, when it occurs with giant kelp. In contrast to giant
kelp, bull kelp is an annual species that produces spores on surface fronds. Harvesting
these fronds can reduce the abundance of future generations of sporophytes (review in
Springer et al. 2010).
Questions over possible impacts of harvesting on the environment and a desire
for sustainability led to various harvesting investigations in California, beginning in
the 1950s. Concerns included possible loss of entire kelp forests, reduction of canopydwelling fishes and invertebrates, reduction of fish populations due to loss of food
and / or habitat, increased beach erosion due to less dampening of water motion, and
an increase in the abundance of drift kelp on beaches from cut fronds and dislodged
plants not captured by the harvester. Early studies of these potential problems were
summarized by North and Hubbs (1968) who concluded that “No adverse influence
of harvesting could be found among the statistics or field observations for the periods
studied.” A later review by Barilotti and Zertuche-González (1990) came to the same
conclusion. Uncut, subsurface fronds grow to replace those cut, and it appeared that
entire plants were only occasionally torn from the bottom during harvesting operations
(Rosenthal et al. 1974). Harvesting the canopy increases light on the bottom, which can
enhance recruitment of Macrocystis (Rosenthal et al. 1974, Kimura and Foster 1984),
but Barilotti et al. (1985) found no adverse effects of harvesting on holdfast growth or
plant survival if harvesting regulations and industry practices on frequency of harvest
were followed. Numerous other organisms are removed along with the cut fronds (e.g.,
North and Hubbs 1968) but overall reductions within a forest have not been reported.
Clendenning (1971b) estimated that 10% or less of giant kelp production was removed
by harvesters in harvested forests. Possible changes in populations of consumers such
as abalone and fishes in kelp forests, beaches, and offshore due to an indirect effect of
removing the biomass and primary production of sea-surface kelp have not been investigated. At least for the present, harvesting impacts are of little concern in California
because only small amounts of giant kelp are now harvested, primarily to feed abalone
in aquaculture facilities (see Chapter 11).
Significant harvesting of Macrocystis (primarily Macrocystis ‘integrifolia’) now occurs
in Chile. Over 2500 metric tons are harvested in some areas of northern Chile, most of
which is used in abalone aquaculture (review in Vásquez 2008). Some is harvested as
drift on the beach, but most is removed by hand, either by cutting fronds or by removing entire plants. Kelp forests are not abundant in northern Chile, and there is concern
that giant kelp is already being depleted. This could worsen as the demand of the aquaculture industry may eventually exceed supply, especially since supply also varies with
oceanographic conditions. Harvesting regulations are being considered, including territorial user rights to encourage sustainability (Vásquez 2008). Cultivation of giant kelp
is being explored as an alternative to harvesting natural stands (Buschmann, Varela,
et al. 2008), and various methods of repopulating natural stands are being investigated

2 26

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

(e.g., Westermeier et al. 2012). To our knowledge the effects of harvesting on associated
Chilean invertebrates and fishes have not been investigated.
M. ‘integrifolia’ has also been harvested for the herring spawn-on-kelp fishery and
other uses in Alaska and British Columbia, and various harvesting experiments have
been done to determine effects, primarily on sustainability of the giant kelp resource
(review in van Tamelen and Woodby 2001). Experimental harvesting results have been
mixed, no doubt in part because different harvesting approaches and frequencies have
been used. Druehl and Breen (1986) found increases in some understory algae and
declines in herbivore abundance and reproduction in a plot harvested six times in
17 months. It seems clear from these studies and those done elsewhere that infrequent
harvests of the canopy have little effect on giant kelp or its associates. However, more
frequent canopy harvests and removal of entire plants can affect giant kelp and associated species. The growth and reproductive characteristics of Macrocystis make it the
most suitable of all kelps for harvesting; plants are very productive, cutting the surface
canopy is relatively easy, and uncut fronds grow to replace those that are removed. Best
management practices will vary depending on ecomorph, location, and forest depth.
There can be minimal impacts on the kelp forest community if harvesting techniques
are based on knowledge derived from studies on the depth and frequency of cutting, as
well as the proportion of the canopy harvested in particular stands that protects other
species living in the canopy.
In New Zealand, kelp harvesting is limited to around 1500 metric tons annually.
Macrocystis comes under the New Zealand Fisheries Quota Management System and
can only be done with permits that allow particular harvests in set areas. As elsewhere,
harvesting is limited to the surface canopy at no more than 1 m depth. This is not
done by large harvesters but by cutters operated from a barge. No significant effects
of harvesting on giant kelp communities have been found (Pirker 2002). The kelp is
used to feed New Zealand abalone being raised for “blister pearl” production for jewelry
(e.g., http://www.bluepearls.com/) and dried to be used as an additive in horticulture,
agriculture, and as a stock food supplement. Its dried form is also marketed as “kelp
pepper” and is used in cooking.

INTR O D U CE D AND INVA S I VE S P E CIE S
M AC R OA LG A E

We use the term “introduced species,” also referred to as nonindigenous or non-native
species, to indicate those not native to a community but transported into it by humans.
Long-distance transport is usually via commercial shipping, aquaculture, or the
aquarium trade. After arrival, introduced species may spread by recreational boating
or natural dispersal. Introduced species may become invasive by spreading prolifically,
although metrics of abundance that constitute an “invasion” are subjective. Invasions
are considered to have negative impacts if they cause reductions in the abundance of

ANTHROPOGENIC EFFECTS ON KELP FORESTS

•

2 27

Sargassum muticum
(moderate sized plant
around 50 cm tall)

Undaria pinnatifida

Sargassum horneri

figure 10.4
Invasive seaweeds found in giant kelp forests in California. Left: S. muticum (moderate sized plant
around 50 cm tall). Center: U. pinnatifi da (around 1 m tall with ruffled sporophylls above holdfast).
Right: S. horneri (moderate sized plant around 75 cm tall; note distinctive, sausage-like floats).

native species or negatively affect economic activities such as aquaculture. Invasive species may also include native species that spread into and become dominant in habitats
where they were not previously found. In this case the spread may not necessarily be
caused directly, or even indirectly, by humans (review in Inderjit et al. 2006).
Relative to harbors, bays, and estuaries, giant kelp forests have experienced few introductions. In California and Baja California, for example, 27 non-native seaweeds have
been found in the flora but only four of these are found in kelp forests and one, Elachista
nigra (also non-native in Australia), is a rare epiphyte on the understory kelp Eisenia
arborea (Miller, K. A. et al. 2011). Of the remaining three, one is so far confined to southern California and Baja California, and two have invaded worldwide. They are all large
seaweeds native to Asia: the fucoids Sargassum muticum and S. horneri (=filicinum), and
the kelp Undaria pinnatifida (figure 10.4). The earliest invader was S. muticum, arriving
in the Northeast Pacific in the 1940s, most likely on oysters shipped from Japan for
aquaculture (review and data in Critchley and Dijkema 1984). It was later introduced
into the Northeast Atlantic and the Mediterranean Sea. The causes of these large-scale
geographic distributional changes and concerns over their ecological and economic
consequences resulted in numerous early and continuing studies on the biology and
ecology of S. muticum (bibliography in Critchley et al. 1990, Britton-Simmons 2004).

228

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

In the Northeast Pacific, S. muticum spread north and south, eventually showing up
in giant kelp forests in southern California. Fronds of this fucoid arise from a perennial holdfast, can be over 2 m tall, and have pneumatocysts that elevate them in the
water column (Abbott and Hollenberg 1976). Ambrose and Nelson (1982) noted a severe
decline in giant kelp around Catalina Island during a warm-water period in 1976, and
S. muticum invaded some of these areas at densities of over 100 plants m−2 at depths of
3–7 m. They experimentally removed the invader in three areas, and juvenile Macrocystis densities increased relative to controls in two of the areas, suggesting S. muticum
inhibited giant kelp recruitment, probably by shading. Foster and Schiel (1993) also
observed S. muticum invade two giant kelp forests at Catalina Island, an invasion that
occurred in association with a very large decline of giant kelp and other native species
during the 1982–1984 El Niño. A few S. muticum were observed in 1982 prior to the
El Niño, but were not abundant enough to occur in samples. Abundance increased
by 1984 after native species declined, and by June 1986 S. muticum plants up to
50 cm tall attained mean densities of over 25 m−2. However, giant kelp and other native
species recovered and S. muticum retreated to open areas within the giant kelp canopy
and then became rare again by 1989 as adult giant kelp densities recovered to around
0.5 m−2. This invasive fucoid may have inhibited giant kelp recruitment but did not
eliminate it, and these studies show that negative effects on giant kelp and probably on
other native macroalgae in these kelp forests were transitory. Miller and Engle (2009)
suggested that S. muticum has now “equilibrated” with natural populations at Catalina
Island. This invader can occur from the low intertidal zone well into subtidal areas.
Its effects on intertidal communities are highly variable (reviews in Britton-Simmons
2004, Schaffelke and Hewitt 2007, Thomsen et al. 2009). Britton-Simmons (2004)
found large negative effects on native understory species in shallow (2 m deep) areas
without a surface canopy, and, based on this and the literature, concluded that “studies
in the subtidal zone indicate relatively strong effects.” The data from giant kelp forests,
however, are more indicative that in this subtidal habitat and perhaps others with a thick
surface canopy, the effects are weak.
The morphology, life history, and dispersal characters of the other fucoid, S. horneri,
are similar to those of S. muticum except the holdfast may not be perennial. As of 2012,
it has only been introduced in southern California and the Pacific Coast of Baja California, Mexico. Its invasion history and distribution were summarized by Miller and
Engle (2009) in southern California and by Riosmena-Rodriguez et al. (2012) in Baja
California. It was probably brought in by commercial shipping and was first observed
in a mainland California harbor in 2003. Plants were discovered at the southern California Channel Islands (e.g., Catalina Island) in 2006, most likely transported from the
mainland by recreational boaters. The invader rapidly spread around Catalina Island
and south along the mainland and offshore islands into Baja California. Plants over
2 m tall have been found in several giant kelp forests around Catalina at depths of
4–12 m, and at Isla Natividad in Baja California at 3–8 m. S. horneri can form a dense

ANTHROPOGENIC EFFECTS ON KELP FORESTS

•

2 29

band around 9 m deep at sites around Catalina Island (D. Kushner, pers. comm.), but its
ecological effects have not been investigated. Densities were around 1 plant m−2 at Isla
Natividad in 2009, and Riosmena-Rodriguezet al. (2012) suggested it currently has no
significant effects on native flora. The species spread north into the northern Channel
Islands off southern California by 2009, where it can occur in dense patches to depths
of 15 m, and may now also be at mainland sites. Plants are shorter than those at southern
sites, and can reproduce when only 50 cm tall. Observations during annual surveys by
the Channel Islands National Park staff (D. Kushner, pers. comm.) indicate no obvious,
negative effects. Plants are eaten by sea urchins and abalone, and serve as habitat for
fishes, especially juvenile kelp bass (Paralabrax clathratus).
U. pinnatifida (wakame) is native to temperate Asian waters where it occurs naturally
from the low intertidal zone to depths of around 8 m and is extensively cultivated for
food. Sporophytes can be up to 2 m long and are usually annual, with reduced abundance in summer related to high water temperatures (Saito 1975). It was intentionally
introduced into the Northeast Atlantic for aquaculture in 1983 and spread widely in
this region and into the Mediterranean Sea, most likely via ships. Shipping and boating
were also the likely vectors for introductions and spreading in Argentina, Australasia, and the Northeast Pacific (reviews in Valentine and Johnson 2003, Thornber et al.
2004, Uwai et al. 2006). It now occurs as part of the understory in giant kelp forests in
Tasmania (Valentine and Johnson 2003), New Zealand (Russell et al. 2008, Schiel and
Thompson 2012), and Catalina Island in southern California (Miller and Engle 2009).
Observations and removals of native canopies composed primarily of large fucoids and
the kelp Ecklonia radiata by Valentine and Johnson (2003) showed that U. pinnatifida
occurs primarily in disturbed areas in Tasmania, especially when the disturbance coincides with the growth season of the sporophytes. They found that invader densities
reached over 19 plants m−2, and declined as native species recolonized. In this case,
however, the disturbance caused an increase in sedimentation, and the native species
that recolonized differed from those present prior to the disturbance. Later experiments showed that a matrix formed by sedimentation around small, filamentous algae
could inhibit the recovery of native species (Valentine and Johnson 2005). Edgar et al.
(2004) found a similar invasion of U. pinnatifida when native canopies were removed.
Russell et al. (2008) described dense stands of the invader above and below the distribution of giant kelp and large native fucoids at sites in New Zealand, but only patches
of U. pinnatifida within the distribution of these natives. Experiments and observations by Thompson and Schiel (2012) and Schiel and Thompson (2012) show that this
invasive kelp is inhibited by the reduced light under native canopies, and invades
by keying into small disturbances in native algal stands in southern New Zealand. It is
also adept at recruiting into coralline turfs, which mostly exclude fucoid recruitment,
but is a poor competitor and does not displace native species. Overall, U. pinnatifida
seems to act as a refuge species and there are no known effects of the invasive kelp on
giant kelp.

23 0

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

U. pinnatifida was reported to be invasive and reduce the diversity of native species
at a site in Argentina that lacked an established native canopy (Casas et al. 2004) but
such displacement has not been observed in intertidal or subtidal areas with established
native canopies (review and data in Schiel and Thompson 2012). There have been efforts
to reduce or eradicate U. pinnatifida (example and review in Hewitt et al. 2005). These
can be expensive and labor intensive, and eradication is probably impossible given the
life history and dispersal characteristics of this and other algal invaders. One invasion
was apparently prevented in the Chatham Islands, New Zealand, by eradicating Undaria
attached to a wrecked vessel before the alga could spread (Wotton et al. 2004).
As discussed above, S. muticum has invaded kelp forests in abundance only when
giant kelp has been substantially reduced by oceanographic conditions, and it has
declined when giant kelp returned. This lack of long-term invasion success may be
the result of the interaction of the life history features and light requirements of potential invaders in areas where native canopies can greatly reduce light. Optimal light for
the growth of small S. muticum is 44 μM m−2 sec−1 (Hales and Fletcher 1989), while
average irradiance at 8 m under a well-developed giant canopy can be around only
35 μM m−2 sec−1 (Gerard 1984), and less if reduction by understory canopies is included.
The fronds of the fucoid are also annual, and are absent in summer (Ambrose and Nelson 1982) or winter (Britton-Simmons 2004), depending on location in the Northeast
Pacific. Britton-Simmons (2004) found that at maximum development their effects on
light varied, with a maximum reduction of only 20%. The available data therefore suggest
that if disturbance to giant kelp results in sufficient light to allow S. muticum to invade,
it is unable to prevent giant kelp recolonization when its fronds are absent, and may only
slow recolonization when fronds are present. Engelen and Santos (2009) suggest that the
key demographic trait allowing S. muticum to dominate tide pools and outcompete native
species is the accumulation of perennial holdfasts and remnant fronds that regenerate
during the growing season, a process unlikely to occur in kelp forests where suitable
growing conditions occur episodically. The light requirements of S. horneri are unknown
but it is primarily a subtidal species in its native range (review in Riosmena-Rodriguez
et al. 2012) so may be better adapted to the low-light conditions common in giant kelp
forests. Whether it will be able to sustain large populations that affect native species in
this habitat is unknown.
Like S. muticum, U. pinnatifida is also an annual with sporophytes absent or reduced
in abundance in summer to autumn, probably in response to increased water temperature (Saito 1975). It may have overlapping generations in some areas (review and data
in Thornber et al. 2004, Schiel and Thompson 2012). Saturating irradiances, 60 μM
m−2 s−1 for gametophytes (Kim and Nam 1997) and an average of 80 μM m−2 sec−1
for sporophytes (Dean and Hurd 2007), are also considerably above those that can
be found in giant kelp forests. Morelissen et al. (2013) found very little gametophyte
growth and no development at 8.5 μM m−2 sec−1, and sporophyte production at
28 μM m−2 sec−1 was high only at elevated concentrations of dissolved inorganic nitrogen.

ANTHROPOGENIC EFFECTS ON KELP FORESTS

•

231

There is also increasing evidence from the field that U. pinnatifida invasion is inhibited
by light reduction from native canopies (Valentine and Johnson 2003, Schiel and Thompson 2012, Thompson and Schiel 2012), so it is unlikely to prosper under a giant kelp
canopy.
These introduced species are likely to be transitory in giant kelp forests, behaving
like the large, native brown alga Desmarestia ligulata in California kelp forests (Edwards
1998): sporophytes become abundant where native canopies are disturbed but then
decline as native species recolonize. As discussed above, however, U. pinnatifida has
been observed in giant kelp forests when giant kelp did not appear to be recently disturbed. This may be because disturbances were not well documented or the surface
canopies of giant kelp and other large brown algae and / or understory kelp canopies were
thin or patchy. Irradiance beneath a giant kelp canopy alone varies exponentially with
canopy density (Gerard 1984). Understanding the effects of giant kelp canopies on native
understory species has been hampered by lack of comparative information on the light
regimes at sites where the studies were done (Chapter 7). This is equally true for invaders in the understory. Moreover, information on the light requirements of introduced
species is not particularly useful to understanding their ecology if the light regimes in
forests where they occur or might occur are unknown. Our knowledge of light within
giant kelp forests comes primarily from a few forests in California with extensive, thick
surface canopies. Forests in other regions with thinner and / or patchier canopies or different understory species may have light regimes more favorable to invaders.
Although there is considerable concern over the possible effects of U. pinnatifida and
other introduced seaweeds in giant kelp forests, eradication is probably impossible, and
the costs of control can be considerable. Thomsen et al. (2009) pointed out the paucity
of evidence for the negative effects of introduced macroalgae, and argued the need for
more and better designed field experiments. We agree that such experiments would
help evaluate environmental concerns and the costs versus benefits of control. In giant
kelp forests and other subtidal habitats with established native canopies, the usefulness
of experiments would be greatly enhanced by information on disturbance and light
regimes, densities of the introduced species, and characteristics of the habitats within
a forest where introduced species do and do not occur. It is highly likely that the wave
of species being transported over international borders will only increase and, because
eradication has proved to be difficult or impossible in most cases, it seems clear that
effective prevention should be a major focus (Floerl et al. 2005).

A NIM A L S

The literature on introductions of animals into giant kelp forests is sparse, with few
species reported. It may be that invasions have been under-reported, that most invasive
animals are native to harbors so kelp forests are not a suitable habitat, or that giant kelp
forests have not been thoroughly surveyed. However, surveys for introduced inverte-

23 2

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

brates have been done at over 20 sites along the open coast of California (Maloney et
al. 2007). Of the introduced species found, five occurred in kelp forests: the bryozoans
Watersipora spp., Bowerbankia gracilisi, and Bugula neritina, the polychaete Hydroides
elegans, and the amphipod Elasmopus rapax (K. Hammerstrom, pers. comm.). Four of
the five occurred in giant kelp holdfasts and most were rare. A few other introduced
species were considered possibly invasive and are awaiting better identification, and
four species were labeled cryptogenic because their origins have yet to be determined.
Of the known invaders, Watesipora spp. are the best studied. These bryozoans have
been introduced to numerous bays and harbors around the world through shipping,
but their native range is presently uncertain (Mackie et al. 2012). Watersipora spp. have
a complex structure and might be expected to enhance habitat. Studies in Bodega Bay
in northern California, where they are part of the fouling community and can cover
>10% of the substratum (Stachowicz and Byrnes 2006), found they had mixed effects
on associated species. They increased the species richness of some mobile invertebrates
but not others, but had no significant effects on sessile species richness (Sellheim et al.
2010). These introduced bryozoans have recently been found in giant kelp forests in the
Monterey area (seanet.stanford.edu) but their effects have not been investigated. There
are as yet no reports of introduced fishes that regularly inhabit California giant kelp
forests (Schroeter and Moyle 2006).
The sea urchin Centrostephanus rodgersii has received considerable attention because
it has had very large impacts in Tasmania, and interacts strongly with other species
(reviews and data in Ling 2008, Ling et al. 2009; see Chapter 8). Strictly speaking, C
rodgersii is not an invasive species because it is native to southeastern Australia and its
spread south into Tasmania is thought to have occurred by larval transport as a result
of a poleward extension of the southward-flowing East Australian Current, a possible
manifestation of ocean climate change (Ling 2008). The urchin has occupied large
areas of kelp forest in eastern and southern Tasmania, and experiments by Ling (2008)
indicate its grazing activity can eliminate 150 macroalgal and invertebrate taxa. As discussed previously, disturbances to native algal species, including those caused by sea
urchins, could also increase Undaria pinnatifida abundance although this may be a
“love–hate” relationship as the urchins may ultimately remove the invasive alga (Valentine and Johnson 2005). The success and persistence of C. rodgersii is affected by lobster
predation which may, in turn, be moderated by regulation of the lobster fishery and
establishment of marine protected areas. These are discussed in later chapters on predation, fishing, and marine protected areas. Castilla et al. (2005) summarized information
on non-indigenous marine algae and invertebrates in Chile, most of which are found
in the intertidal zone, bays, and aquaculture facilities. No species were characterized as
associated with giant kelp forests.
At present, giant kelp forests appear to be little affected by introduced seaweeds or
invertebrates, probably because the invasive algae do not compete well with giant kelp
and other native canopy species for light, and invasive invertebrates are mostly bay and

ANTHROPOGENIC EFFECTS ON KELP FORESTS

•

233

estuarine species. While we have tried to avoid Chicken Little syndrome (“the sky is
falling”) that characterizes many environmental predictions, there are science-based
reasons for predicting that giant kelp forests could become highly modified as multiple
stressors like runoff, ocean warming, more frequent El Niños, and perhaps more grazer
introductions interact to affect giant kelp. It can only be hoped that no particularly noxious or aggressive species get into giant kelp forests and that the innate production and
diversity of these forests will help buffer them from untoward effects.

23 4

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

11
HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT
KELP AND KELP FOREST
ORGANISMS
There is no doubt that whatever may be the direct food value of algae they are
useful because of their iodine content, which serves as a protection against
goitre, whilst the bulk and water prevent constipation.
—Chapman and Chapman (1980)

Seaweed offers kelping hand for biofuels.
—Businessgreen (2012)

Giant kelp and its associated species have supported many human uses and activities,
from food and chemicals to recreation and cultural enrichment. As discussed in Chapter 1, the impetus for a better understanding of the biology and ecology of giant kelp
beginning in the early 1900s was the development of harvesting and processing facilities in California for the production of potash and, later, alginate. Although Macrocystis
is now only a minor species in the extraction industry, its other uses are varied and some
are important for human activities. In this chapter, we discuss the uses of giant kelp
as well as forest-associated species, including those comprising important recreational
and commercial fisheries.

FO O D AND FE R TILIZE R

Seaweeds have been consumed by humans since they first inhabited coastlines, and
giant kelp is no exception. Most current consumption of kelp is in Asia of species other
than Macrocystis. Consumption is especially common in Japan and China where there
is a long tradition of eating kelp, especially Laminaria and Undaria (Japanese: kombu,
wakame; Chinese: haidai, quandai-cai; other names are used depending on the species
and preparation). These are prepared and consumed in various ways, most commonly
as part of soups, stews, and salads (review in Chapman and Chapman 1980). Human

2 35

consumption is often based on cultural traditions, flavor, and texture, and not necessarily on nutritional value. Such traditions and tastes are not as common in the temperate
areas of the world where giant kelp occurs and, although some Macrocystis is consumed,
it is not discussed as human food in reviews by either Chapman and Chapman (1980) or
McHugh (2003). In the Northeast Pacific, herring (Clupea pallasi) spawn on Macrocystis
and other kelps, and the resulting “spawn on kelp” is eaten by humans (Turner 1995).
This phenomenon has become the basis of a small fishery in California and other areas
in the Northeast Pacific where giant kelp is attached to lines or floats in herring spawning areas and collected after spawning has occurred (van Tamelen and Woodby 2001,
Waters et al. 2001). The majority of the harvest is shipped for sale to Japan. Kelp in various forms is also sold as a “health product,” but the kind of kelp is often not specified.
Giant kelp is currently harvested in New Zealand, where it is dried, flaked, and sold as
a food seasoning called “Valẽre Kelp Pepper” by NZ Kelp.
The primary nutritional value of kelps is in their mineral and vitamin content, but
these are not exceptional in most cases. As an example, we compare a similar list of
nutrients for kelp (Laminaria spp.) and a common vegetable (carrots; see Table 11.1).
Complete comparative data could not be found for Macrocystis, but data for some giant
kelp minerals in North (1987a) indicate that Laminaria and Macrocystis are likely to
be similar. Generally, carrots and kelp contain similar nutrients, although there are
exceptions (e.g., calcium, potassium, sodium, iodine, folate, vitamin A, carotenoids).
However, iodine content is a particularly important difference because it is essential
to prevent goiter, a significant health problem in areas with little iodine in the soil and
without access to iodized salt (reviewed in Zimmerman 2009). Historically at least, this
was a primary reason for kelp consumption in China, where iodine was scarce in the
vast inland areas away from the coast (Cheng 1969). Kelp contains carbohydrates and
proteins, but the carbohydrates are in forms such as alginate and mannitol that are not
readily digested by humans (Grabitske and Slavin 2008), and digestion of proteins from
kelp may not produce soluble nitrogen compounds (Chapman and Chapman 1980).
Moreover, kelp can concentrate elements such as arsenic which, when eaten in large
quantities as a herbal supplement, can cause poisoning (Amster et al. 2007). The benefits of kelp consumption as a source of energy and amino acids are therefore unclear.
For those with a predilection for eating giant kelp, therefore, its consumption is a matter
of taste, availability, suitable alternatives, and price.
There is also a long history of seaweed use as food for terrestrial animals. As for
humans, the nutritional value and digestibility indicate the main benefits are in mineral
content, particularly iodine, in areas where pasturelands are mineral deficient (review
in Chapman and Chapman 1980). Feral or free-ranging cattle will graze on kelp, as
seen historically for other kelp genera in Ireland and more recently in the uninhabited,
subantarctic Auckland Islands, where cattle roamed freely for over 100 years until they
were removed for ecological restoration. Giant kelp is currently used occasionally as
an additive in sheep food because it is believed to improve their coats (R. Beattie, pers.

23 6

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

table 11.1

Nutrients in raw carrots and the wet, edible part (blade)
of Laminaria spp.

Nutrient

Units

Carrots (amount: 100 g−1 raw)

Kelp (amount: 100 g−1 wet)

Water
Protein
Total fat
Total fiber
Total sugars

g
g
g
g
g

88.29
0.93
0.24
2.8
4.74

90.3a
1.68
0.56
1.3
0.6

mg
mg
mg
mg
mg
mg
mg
mg
mg
mg
mg

33
0.3
12
35
320
69
0.24
0.5
0.14
0.1
Lowb

168
2.85
1.21
42
89
233
1.23
0.13
0.2
0.7
13–86c

mg
mg
mg
mg
mg
mg
μg
mg
μg
μg
μg
μg
mg
μg

5.9
0.07
0.06
0.98
0.27
0.14
19
8.8
835
8285
3477
1
0.66
13.2

3.0
0.05
0.15
0.47
0.62
0.00
180
12.8
6
70
0
0
0.87
0.25

minerals
Calcium
Iron
Magnesium
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Zinc
Copper
Manganese
Selenium
Iodine
vitamins
Vitamin C
Thiamin
Riboblavin
Niacin
Pantothenic acid
Vitamin B6
Total folate
Choline
Vitamin A
β-carotene
α-carotene
Lycopene
Vitamin E
Vitamin K

source: Data from USDA 2012 except
a. for Macrocystis from Rassweiler et al. (2008);
b. from Zimmerman (2009);
c. from Chapman (1970).
notes: Fatty acids low for both (not shown). Amino acid composition and amounts similar and low for both
(not shown).

figure 11.1
Kelp harvesting in New Zealand. Roger and Nicki Beattie with drying crop of giant kelp, used for
food seasoning (“Kelp Pepper,” Valẽre), soil conditioner (“Zelp”), and as food for New Zealand abalone (Haliotis iris) in culturing blister pearls (“Blue Pearls,” Eyris pearls, http://www.bluepearls
.com/).
source: Photo by D. Schiel.

comm.; figure 11.1). Although once harvested in California as a food additive and seasoning (Neushul 1987), Macrocystis is now a relatively small part of this use. It is dried,
processed into flakes or powder, and sold as a food supplement (e.g., “Zelp” by NZ Kelp
in New Zealand, “Seaweed Flour” by SurAlga in Argentina). It may also be marketed
as a nutritional additive of food for aquarium fish (e.g., “Omega One Kelp Flakes” by
Omega Sea Ltd. in the United States), and has been evaluated as a nutritional additive
for farmed rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (e.g., Mansilla and Ávila 2011). It may
also be used simply as a binding agent in pelletized food (McHugh 2003).
Macrocystis and other seaweeds are the natural foods of marine grazers so one would
expect they would be good food for the aquaculture of these species. With the decline of
giant kelp as a source of alginate and with decreases in wild abalone stocks, the largest
use of giant kelp is now as food for farmed abalone. For the 5 years from 2007 to 2011,
an average of 3728 metric tons were harvested annually in California (figure 11.2), and
around 96% of it was used to feed farmed abalone (primarily the red abalone Haliotis

23 8

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

Harvest (10³ metric tons wet weight)

For acetone and potash

360

For abalone
food

Primarily for alginate
200
EN

EN

EN

EN

150

100

50
ND

0
1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020

figure 11.2
Giant kelp harvest in California. Data to 1999 from Bedford (2001) and from 1999 to 2010 from
R. Flores-Miller (pers. comm.). No data available from 1921 to 1930.
EN = El Niño.
notes: Major uses are indicated at the top of graph. Note that the harvest from 2006 onward was around
3000 tonnes.

rufescens (R. Flores Miller, pers. comm.). Vásquez (2008) reported that over 4500 wet
metric tons were collected for abalone food in Chile in 2005–2006. Farmed abalone in
Chile are primarily H. rufescens introduced from California but also H. discus hannai
introduced from Japan (Flores-Aguilar et al. 2007). Around 400 metric tons of Macrocystis are used annually in southern New Zealand as food for endemic abalone (called
paua, H. iris), which are raised for food and “blister pearl” production (e.g., Schiel 1997).
Abalone are farmed in many other places in the world (review in Cook and Gordon 2010)
but because giant kelp is not abundant, collection of wild seaweed is restricted, or the
abalone grow better on alternative food, other algae or manufactured feed are used.
The fact that seaweeds have long been used as fertilizer is exemplified by the word
“kelp,” which is derived from Middle English as a term for the ash derived from burning primarily large brown algae and used, in part, to fertilize fields. As discussed in
Chapter 1, the initial impetus for harvesting large quantities of giant kelp in California
was to produce potash for fertilizer. Giant kelp and other seaweeds are still marketed in
several areas of the world for fertilizer, but this industry no longer exists in California.
As McHugh (2003) pointed out, however, kelps are relatively low in phosphorous and
their trace elements are low relative to plant requirements. A more important benefit
may be as a soil conditioner. However, the efficacy of several liquid fertilizers, including
15 derived from seaweeds, was rigorously examined by Edmeades (2002) in a metaanalysis of nearly 800 trials involving a range of test crops. His analyses showed there

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

23 9

were “no practical effects when applied as recommended” and he concluded that this is
not surprising since the products do not contain high enough concentrations of nutrients, or organic and growth compounds. These results are, no doubt, a rather large
disappointment to the industry, but there are many true believers in the merits of kelp
fertilizer and so a small industry is likely to persist.

CHE MI C AL S

As indicated above, the large-scale production of chemicals from giant kelp was stimulated by the need for potash fertilizer in the western United States, and the need for
potash and acetone as components of the smokeless gunpowder, cordite, used by the
British during World War I. Hercules Powder Company secured a contract to supply
cordite and developed a large harvesting operation and processing plant near San Diego,
California, in 1916 (review in Neushul 1987). Hercules also produced other chemicals
including various organic solvents, tars, and alginate. The resource demand of this and
other kelp harvesting companies resulted in harvests exceeding 350,000 metric tons
(figure 11.1) and concerns that demand would eventually exceed the productivity of the
resource (Neushul 1987). The high demand, however, was largely the result of a war
economy. After World War I ended and other chemical sources became available at lower
cost, the potash and gunpowder industry rapidly declined and was replaced by a smaller
(in terms of giant kelp harvest) alginate industry.
The alginate industry expanded as a result of creative chemistry and product marketing (Neushul 1987). Algin is a complex polysaccharide (see Chapter 1, History of
Research) that can be processed into various types of alginate, such as sodium, calcium,
and propylene glycol alginate, which vary in viscosity, gel strength, and other properties depending on their intended use. The many uses include as a suspending agent in
food, in paper sizing, and as molding material for dental impressions (Chapman and
Chapman 1980). Algin is abundant in giant kelp, ranging from 13% to 24% dry weight
(Chapman and Chapman 1980, Draget et al. 2005). At the peak of the alginate industry, large harvesters (figure 11.3) cut over 150,000 wet metric tons annually in forests
from Pacific Baja California, Mexico, to Monterey in central California (figure 11.2),
and transported it to San Diego, California, for processing. Assuming that most of this
was harvested in California, it amounted to about 5% of the total giant kelp production
(see Biofuels below). With increased use of dried kelp from other areas of the world,
advances in processing that can produce a variety of products in one processing plant,
and rising costs of production in California (including the need for large amounts of
water as well as waste disposal), large-scale giant kelp harvesting and algin processing
in California ended in 2006. Most of the current supply of algin comes from Europe
and Asia, extracted from Laminaria spp. harvested in many areas and cultivated in
China, Lessonia spp. harvested in Chile, and the fucoid Ascophyllum nodosum harvested
in Europe. Dried plants from the countries of harvest are now commonly shipped to

240

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

figure 11.3
The giant kelp-harvesting vessel “Kelstar,” built in 1977 and operated by
Kelco Co. in San Diego, California. The vessel was 52 m long and could hold
545 metric tons. Cutting blades were located at the bottom of the conveyors,
and the entire cutting apparatus could be raised out of the water while cruising to a harvesting site. Cutting was regulated by law to no more than 1.2 m
below the surface.
source: Photo courtesy of Ron J. McPeak, UCSB Library Digital Collection.

algin production facilities elsewhere (Bixler and Porse 2011). Sources might change
again, however, as new uses for alginate are discovered, such as in the anodes of highcapacity batteries (Kovalenko et al. 2011). Bixler and Porse (2011) suggested the cessation of alginate production in California was also a result of concern that harvesters
disturbed sea otters (Enhydra lutris). This disturbance was minor, however, and the
cost of sea otter observers on harvesters to monitor it was considered to be insignificant
by Kelco, the kelp harvesting company (D. C. Barilotti, pers. comm.). Bixler and Porse
(2011) also stated that the cessation of Macrocystis harvesting in California has increased
the amount of giant kelp wrack on beaches, causing an “environmental problem.” The
environmental problem was not stated, and we are unaware of hard evidence of any
such increases. If there were increases, they may well be beneficial to the animals that
consume beach wrack and aid in recycling it into nearshore waters (see Chapter 6, Giant
kelp “beaches”).

B I O F UE L AND C A R B ON S E Q U E S TR ATI O N

Sharp increases in the price of gasoline in the 1970s heightened interest in energy
self-sufficiency and stimulated research on algae as a source of fuel (reviews in Bird
and Benson 1987). Interest has recently been rekindled for these same reasons as well

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

2 41

as being a way to inhibit climate change by reducing CO2 in the atmosphere and ocean.
The conversion of algae into biofuel results in recycling of CO2 rather than releasing
more of it from fossil fuel (e.g., Chung et al. 2011) or sequestering it for long periods
of time such as in wood or peat. Seaweeds have their advantages and disadvantages
compared to producing biofuels from terrestrial plants. Seaweeds generally lack lignin
so their carbohydrates are more amenable to digestion and conversion into fuel. Conversion has been enhanced by the recent genetic engineering of a microbe that directly
degrades and metabolizes alginate, and produces bioethanol with a yield of 0.281 weight
of ethanol per dry weight of macroalgae. This is about 80% of the theoretical maximum
yield from algal sugars (Wargacki et al. 2012). Other advantages are that seaweeds would
not remove land and other resources for food crops (Stokstad 2012) and would not cause
CO2 release associated with clearing new land (Fargione et al. 2008).
The high productivity of giant kelp and relative ease of harvesting its surface canopy
make it a prime target for conversion to fuel (e.g., Roesijadi et al. 2010, Stokstad 2012).
A critical examination of its potential, however, indicates several disadvantages. Assuming a conversion rate of 0.281 weight of ethanol-to-dry weight of kelp and given that
Macrocystis is around 90% water (Table 11.1), giant kelp would yield about 0.356 L of
ethanol per dry kg of biomass (ethanol = 0.789 kg L −1). Assuming further that the entire
maximum of around 150,000 wet metric tons that was harvested annually for alginates
in California was used to produce ethanol, the amount of ethanol produced would be
4.7 × 106 L or 1.2 × 106 gallons. Although variable from year to year, kelp forests in
California cover some 10,400 ha (review in Bedford 2001), and Reed et al. (2008) determined the annual productivity of Macrocystis ‘pyrifera’ in natural stands to be around
2.3 kg dry weight per square meter of kelp forest. If all stands were similarly productive
(actually, they are not), the entire production of giant kelp in California, if harvested and
converted to ethanol, would yield around 85 × 106 L or 23 × 106 gallons. This may seem
like a considerable amount, but Californians combusted 18 × 109 gallons of motor fuel
in 2009 (USDT 2011). Using all the giant kelp productivity in the state would therefore
replace only 0.13% of the fossil motor fuel demand. This accounting does not subtract
the energy needed to harvest, process, and transport the ethanol, or that compared to
100% gasoline from fossil fuel, a mixture of 85% ethanol and 15% gasoline reduces the
distance travelled per unit fuel consumed by 25–30% (USDE 2012).
The calculations above indicate that harvesting natural stands of giant kelp cannot
provide important amounts of fuel, although this might be accomplished by growing
it in monocultures on offshore farms. Offshore farming was investigated in California
from the late 1970s to mid-1980s (reviews in Neushul 1987, North 1987b). The research
included studies of potential deep-water farm structures (North 1987b), harvestable
production (Gerard and North 1984), and, because of low nutrients in offshore surface
waters, nutrients available in artificially upwelled water (Kuwabara 1982). The work
of Gerard and North (1984) is noteworthy as it was done in the largest container ever
used to grow giant kelp in the ocean. The container was moored in a cove at Catalina

242

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

Island in southern California. It consisted of a hemispherical bag, 15 m in diameter
and 12 m deep, made from polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and held open and floating at the
surface by a support structure. Viewed underwater from the outside it looked like the
nose of a blimp, and was called “The Hemidome.” It could hold around 50 adult plants,
and nutrients could be added to the water pumped into it from the surrounding water.
Unfortunately, after the first set of experiments in the spring of 1982, the 1982–1983
El Niño arrived in the region. Elevated temperatures stimulated bacterial growth that
caused the plants to degenerate, strong winds caused the bag to split, and experiments
were discontinued (North 1998).
The effects of plant density and artificial fertilization were also examined on an
experimental nearshore farm established on a sand bottom by anchoring plant holdfasts in mesh bags fi lled with gravel. This farm produced a harvestable biomass of
only around 1 kg (dry weight) per square meter annually (Neushul and Harger 1985).
Assuming that the harvestable biomass from the canopy is around 50% of total biomass
produced (Gerard and North 1984), the total biomass production of experimental farms
was similar to that of natural stands.
Work on offshore farm structures culminated in the placement of a 0.25 acre
(0.1 ha) module that would be part of an array of such modules (North 1987b, 1998).
The quarter acre module (QAM; figure 11.4) included a central buoy with diesel pumps
to bring up nutrient-rich water from a depth of 450 m, and a surrounding curtain to
reduce currents and retain the nutrients in the artificially upwelled water. The QAM
was installed 8 km off the southern California mainland over 550 m of water in 1978
and populated with 100 adult giant kelp transplants. However, as with many good ideas,
this system did not accomplish its intended purpose and, in fact, ended in instructive
failure. The motion of the module caused plants to entangle with the structure, and the
curtain and plants were soon removed by winter storms. A new cohort of plants, most
likely recruiting from spores produced by the original transplants, were lost due to abrasion on barnacles that settled on the structure, entanglement, grazing by fi sh attracted
to it, and large numbers of sea urchins settling on it and grazing on plant remnants.
Finally, the project was abandoned when the structure of the QAM was lost during a
storm in 1979. These studies not only demonstrated that giant kelp could potentially
be grown in the open ocean using artificially upwelled water, but also highlighted that
numerous engineering and biological problems will need to be solved before it can be
done successfully, especially on a large scale. Without knowing the solutions to these
problems as well as how giant kelp would be harvested and how fuel would be produced
and delivered to the user, costs cannot be accurately determined. So far, none of the
trials has been particularly encouraging.
With the exception of pilot studies in Chile (Buschmann, Varela, et al. 2008) there
are no current projects (as of 2013) focused on large-scale Macrocystis farming, but
farming of other kelps for biofuel is being investigated elsewhere (e.g., Seaweed Energy
Solutions 2012). The information for Macrocystis highlights the engineering, biological,

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

2 43

Machinery buoy
Substrate for
kelp transplants

Approx.
water
line

Upper U joint

Lower
U joint

Hoses for
dispersing
upwelled water

Locations of
kelp transplants

Upwelling pipe
450 m

figure 11.4
The quarter acre module for growing giant kelp at deep, offshore sites. The module was
32 m in diameter at its widest point. The lower diagram is an artist’s conception of what
the module would have looked like when fully populated with giant kelp.
source: From North (1987b).

and ecological difficulties likely to be encountered in large-scale cultivation of seaweeds
in offshore farms. Moreover, the fuel production estimates discussed above show that
producing enough fuel to replace the yearly fossil motor fuel consumption in California
alone would require farms in the order of 10,000 km2. Roesijadi et al. (2010) estimated
that around 104 km2 of seaweed growth was needed to replace 1% of the U. S. gasoline
demand. They used higher productivity values and lower water content than in our
calculations, and apparently assumed that all the production could be harvested. Their
calculated area, therefore, is most likely an underestimate. Nevertheless, both their estimates and ours involve very large areas. Farms at this scale could cause large changes
in water quality, affect fisheries, and have confl icts with shipping (Hruby 1978) and
other activities. These challenges and confl icts remain largely uninvestigated and are
nowhere near being resolved.
Analyses of using giant kelp as biofuel indicate that farming the land is comparatively easy. It highlights the scaling and consequent environmental and engineering
problems of replacing fossil fuel with kelp or other seaweed biofuel and, therefore, the
importance of energy efficiency and conservation. It also enhances our appreciation of
the vast amounts of plant biomass accumulated over geological time that was naturally
processed into fossil fuel. It may be, however, that biofuel from giant kelp harvested or
grown on a smaller scale, combined with biofuels from other sources such as microalgae, as well as solar, wind, geothermal, and nuclear energy, will make an important
contribution to fuel self-sufficiency and the reduction of greenhouse gasses. Time will
tell.
Sequestering of carbon dioxide in kelp and other seaweeds has also been discussed.
Atmospheric carbon dioxide could potentially be reduced by increasing the biomass
of algae that might serve as a reservoir for CO2 which would otherwise be taken up
in the atmosphere and ocean waters. The general argument is that carbon in the biomass of seaweeds could also be sequestered in a place where it could not return to
the atmosphere for a very long time. Relative to terrestrial plants, however, giant kelp
has a high biomass turnover, low litter accumulation, and lacks structural carbohydrates like lignin that are difficult to metabolize or decompose (see Chapter 6). Chung
et al. (2011) concluded that carbon sequestration by seaweeds was potentially important only if the stored carbon were used to make biofuel that would replace fossil fuel.
Wilmers et al. (2012) argued that an increase in standing stock of natural kelp stands
through the removal of sea urchins by sea otters would increase the reservoir of carbon
that would otherwise accumulate in the atmosphere and ocean. Some of this increase
would be exported as drift into the deep sea, in their opinion resulting in long-term
carbon sequestration. Their calculations, however, do not consider potentially large seasonal changes in kelp biomass, or large variations in biomass due to El Niños or other
episodic disturbances. Moreover, the amount of kelp that ends up in the deep sea at
a depth where carbon would be sequestered from the atmosphere for long periods is
unknown.

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

2 45

AQ UACU LT U R E

Aquaculture of giant kelp for fuel, other chemicals, and animal feed has been explored
and continues to be considered, but has yet to become a regular source for commercial
use. This is partly because harvests from the large natural stands in California and
elsewhere have been sufficient to meet the needs of various users, presumably at a
cost less than that of farming kelp. Whether this will continue is unknown. Certainly,
kelp aquaculture is big business in parts of Asia, particularly China, Japan, and Korea,
where inlets and bays often have large cultivated crops of kelp. These are mostly Saccharina (=Laminaria) japonica and Undaria pinnatifida, which are grown for human
consumption (McHugh 2003) and, more recently, as a source of algin (Bixler and Porse
2011). Such uses of coastal waters, often with attendant problems of excessive nutrients,
are uncommon in the rest of the world, both because of the relative unimportance of
seaweed in diets and because of user conflicts and regulatory issues. Giant kelp aquaculture is being actively pursued in Chile where demand for it as food for abalone may
eventually exceed possible harvest from natural stands (Vásquez 2008). In Chile, experimental giant kelp farms have been developed on floating lines anchored to the bottom
and planted with small sporophytes grown in the laboratory (Gutierrez et al. 2006) or
with holdfast fragments from Macrocystis ‘integrifolia’ (Westermeier et al. 2013). An
integrated aquaculture system is being investigated for growing Macrocystis that uses
nutrients from salmon or other marine animal farms to produce useful giant kelp biomass (Buschmann, Hernández-González, et al. 2008). Hybridization experiments with
plants from different geographic regions in Chile indicate selecting particular hybrids
for cultivation can potentially increase yields (Westermeier et al. 2011).
The goal of giant kelp aquaculture is to produce a sustainable source of large sporophytes from which biomass can be extracted, most easily with a harvester at the sea
surface. The questions are where to place the farm, which involves consideration of
regulatory constraints and use conflicts, how to construct it, how to populate it, and what
are the optimal depths and plant densities. The answers, of course, will vary depending
on production requirements and where the farming is to be done. Results from experimental farming (e.g., Druehl 1979, Neushul and Harger 1985, North 1987b) show the
importance of grazers and ocean climate to farm success, particularly variation in temperature and nutrients. Because Macrocystis has floats and can occupy the entire water
column, a critical consideration is water motion because it can cause damage to farm
structures and to plants as they entangle with the structures. Planting of experimental
farms has been done using all phases in the life history of giant kelp (figure 2.1). “Seeding” with very small stages is easier than transplanting larger sporophytes but must
be done when conditions are suitable for reproduction and growth at the depth where
planting is done.
Because of its fast growth, large biomass, and other perceived production benefits,
Macrocystis has been grown outside its natural range. In the late 1980s to early 1990s,
a commercial venture attempted to grow California red abalone, Haliotis rufescens, and

2 46

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

giant kelp in an onshore integrated system in Hawaii. The giant kelp was grown in a
very large outdoor tank. Because warm, nutrient-poor tropical waters are unsuitable
for the growth of both of these species, the venture took advantage of cold, nutrientrich seawater pumped to land from deep water on the Island of Hawai’i as part of what
is now the Natural Energy Laboratory of Hawaii Authority. The venture failed, at least
partially because the high light and nutrient levels required for kelp growth caused
plankton blooms in the tank, which then inhibited giant kelp growth (M. Foster, pers.
obs.) This again highlights the difficulties of managing isolated marine systems. Giant
kelp was also introduced to the coast of Brittany, France, in the early 1970s as a potential
source of alginate (Boalch 1981). This generated criticism by marine scientists concerned about the potential spread of giant kelp as well as species associated with it to
areas outside their natural range, and consequent impacts to native marine communities (Druehl 1973). The British Admiralty was rumored to be concerned that invading
Macrocystis would impede ship traffic, and power companies argued that drift plants
might clog the cooling water intakes of coastal power plants. The project was terminated
in response to these concerns, plants in the sea were removed, and there have been no
reports of escapees. Giant kelp from Baja California, Mexico, was introduced to China
in 1978 and again in 1982. Gametophytes were imported and cultured, and the resulting sporophytes were transplanted to the field for growth on subsurface lines (Tianjing
et al. 1984, North et al. 1988). Farming developed using subsurface and surface farm
structures, and plants were harvested for abalone food, algin, and the production of
kelp pickles. Cultivation has recently ceased due to problems with plant fitness (possibly inbreeding depression; Raimondi et al. 2004), but may be resumed in the future
(J. Chen, pers. com.).
There have been efforts to increase the productivity and size of natural forests, in part
to improve or sustain potential harvesting. For example, giant kelp productivity declines
in southern California when nutrients are low. To examine this relationship experimentally and determine if adding nutrients might increase harvestable yield, North et al.
(1981) fertilized natural beds with ammonium sulfate and phosphate using a helicopter. The results were inconclusive, but suggestive that such fertilization might be economically justifiable at times when nutrients are very low. There have been numerous
efforts to increase forest size along the southern California mainland by eliminating
sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus franciscanus and S. purpuratus). Urchins were vacuumed
from the sea floor, macerated, and pumped back into the sea in kelp forests in southern
California in the 1960s. In other areas, quicklime was dumped over urchin grounds
with the aim of killing vast numbers of them. Giant kelp forests increased in some of
these areas eventually, but the overall increase around this time was more likely the
result of improvements in water quality rather than the removal of urchins (Foster and
Schiel 2010). Transplanting juveniles or holdfast fragments of M. ‘integrifolia’ is being
considered in Chile as a way to enhance natural beds and help mitigate the effects of
overharvesting (Westermeier et al. 2012).

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

2 47

figure 11.5
Sport diver swimming in a kelp forest (upper)
and visitors viewing the giant kelp forest tank
in the Monterey Bay Aquarium (lower).
source: Upper photo is courtesy of John Heine;
lower photo is courtesy of Ed Bierman.

R E CR E ATI O NA L U S E

The diversity, beauty, and bounty of kelp forests attract recreational users worldwide. In
California, for example, over 12 million people enjoy some form of marine recreation
yearly (Pendleton and Rooke 2006) and although there is little hard data on the amount
of use associated with kelp forests, it is no doubt very large. Sport divers, kayakers, and
boaters are common in and around kelp forests during good weather (figure 11.5). Sport
diving in particular has become a major industry, with diving facilities increasingly available even in remote locations (e.g., Scuba Advisor 2012). Many divers now enjoy just
taking pictures or observing wildlife, while others spear fish or catch lobsters, abalone,
and other benthic animals for food. Hook-and-line fishers catch a wide variety of species
in and around kelp forests. Other users simply enjoy observing birds and seals from
shore or in tour boats; sea otters are a special attraction in central California. Altogether,
the recreational and tourism aspects of kelp forest usage represent major industries and
enjoyment, and are potentially in conflict with other commercial activities. The dynamic
tension between such uses presents considerable challenges to management of the
coastal zone and will undoubtedly assume increasing importance in the decades to come.
S P O R T FI S HIN G

Recreational or sport fishing can be extensive around giant kelp forests. In California,
anything from a single person on a rock or pier to large party boats with dozens of

248

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

fishers testing their luck can be seen on most days near the edges of kelp forests from
central California southward. Potentially, dozens or even hundreds of species of fish can
be caught on lines. Divers also spear many of these species as well as gathering invertebrates. Species associated with giant kelp along the west coast of North America are
primarily rockfish (Sebastes spp.), surfperch (Embioticidae), cabezon (Scorpaenichthys
marmoratus), greenling (Hexagrammos spp.), lingcod (Ophiodon elongates), sheephead
(Semicossyphus pulcher), spiny lobster (Panulirus interruptus), and abalone (Haliotis spp.).
There is also extensive spearfishing in Chile. In both California and Chile, the effects
of recreational fishers on key species can be extensive (Dayton et al. 1998, Godoy et al.
2010).
Recreational (i.e., noncommercial) fisheries are notoriously difficult to regulate and
manage. Unlike commercial fisheries, which usually have total catch limits for individual species as a key part of management, recreational fisheries have catch limits for
individual fishers, usually as a daily “bag” limit per species. As the number of fishers
increase, these catch limits must be adjusted, often with sparse or inadequate information of what has actually been landed. Commercial fisheries are often seen as the
major culprit in the demise of fish populations and in potential trophic effects cascading
through various ecosystems (e.g., Jackson et al. 2001), but it is now widely recognized
that recreational fisheries can contribute to fisheries declines. Cooke and Cowx (2004,
2006), for example, examined common issues among recreational and commercial fisheries and found that fisheries-induced selection, trophic changes, habitat degradation,
and fishing effort were remarkably similar among the two fishery sectors. They argued
that management of recreational fishing should have the same urgency as commercial
fisheries. Although it is often difficult to judge the scale and scope of recreational fisheries because of the diff use nature of the fishery and under-reporting, recreational landings of inshore species targeted by this sector was around 23% of landings nationwide
in the United States for “populations of concern”; for example, 87% of the landings
of bocaccio (Sebastes paucispinus) on the Pacific coast were from recreational fishing
(Coleman et al. 2004). The extent of the recreational fishery in California was demonstrated by Schroeder and Love (2002) for 19 nearshore fish species that included
12 rockfish species and California sheephead (figure 11.6). They found that landings
overall declined from the late 1980s onward for these species, that recreational fishers
caught 87% of total landings during the 1980s, and that this decreased to 60% in the
1990s. The declining catch in the 1990s saw a relative increase in commercial landings
at least partially due to development of the commercial live finfish market.
In response to overfishing and the decline of many stocks, regulatory agencies such
as the California Department of Fish and Wildlife brought in many regulations to
limit fish landings. These include marine reserves, areas closed to fishing, size limits, bag limits, depth limits for particular species, closed seasons, and prohibition on
landing some species altogether (CDFW 2014a). The decline in the fishery of rockfish
has been so great over the past two decades (Mason 2004) that several species are no

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

2 49

A.
Total landings metric tons

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Year

B.
Proportion of total landings

1.0
Commercial
fishing

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1980

Recreational
fishing
1985

1990

1995

2000

Year
figure 11.6
Annual landings of fish species in the nearshore fishery off California.
No recreational data were collected in 1990–1992. (A) Total landings,
summing both recreational and commercial catches. Straight lines for
each data set were calculated using the least squares method. (B) Proportion of total landings caught in each year by recreational or commercial fishers. Fish included were 13 species of Sebastes, 2 Hexagrammos,
S. pulcher, Cebidichthys violaceus, Scorpaena guttata, and S. marmoratus.
source: From Schroeder and Love (2002).

longer allowed to be taken by sport fishers. These include yellow rockfish (S. ruberrimus), bronze-spotted rockfish (S. gilli), Canary rockfish (S. pinniger) and cowcod (S.
levis) (CDFW 2014a). The onus, of course, is on fishers to be able to tell the difference
between the numerous species of rockfish and ensure that they do not land prohibited
species.

25 0

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

Of all the fished species associated with giant kelp forests, abalone are almost entirely
reliant on kelp for food and their populations have been severely depleted over time. In
California, there has been such severe depletion of abalone populations of all species that
the commercial fishery was closed. Abalone “report cards” are required for sport fishing
of abalone in California. These entail recording details of date and area, and a tag must
be attached to all individuals landed. Report cards of individual catches must be reported
to CDFW to ensure that no one exceeds the limit of 10 H. rufescens annually from areas
open to fishing. This allows a fairly accurate assessment of landings and an adjustment
of the bag limit, if necessary. Since data were kept from 2002 onward, the recreational
landings have averaged 256,000 individuals annually (CDFW 2014b).
Chile presents an interesting contrast to California. In a paper entitled “Spearfishing
to depletion,” Godoy et al. (2010) described the severe effects of recreational and artisanal spearfishing on three temperate nearshore species. Graus nigra (vieja negra), S.
darwini (Chilean sheephead or pejerro), and Medialuna ancietae (acha) comprise >98%
of spearfish landings. Since the mid-1980s, landings of these species have declined
from a peak of ca. 900 metric tons to <100 metric tons by the mid-2000s, and their
sizes are considerably smaller. One species (M. ancietae) has been so depleted that it
is reportedly now practically unknown to a younger generation of spearfishers. The
other two species show high fidelity to particular reefs and have proven to be especially
vulnerable to spearfishing. Godoy et al. (2010) concluded that catches of reef fishes have
shifted from large carnivorous species to small omnivorous and herbivorous species,
with potential consequences on subtidal reef community structure.
It is difficult, if not impossible, to find reliable recreational landings data for most
kelp forest species worldwide. It is nevertheless clear that this sector of fishing can have
impacts and requires better data and good regulation, as does the commercial sector.
The lobbying power of the recreational fishing sector is strong and widely dispersed,
which adds special challenges to effective management. The management of recreational fishing, however, must continue to be more fully integrated into overall management plans of kelp forests that include all types of extractions (see Chapter 12).

CO MME R C I A L F I S H IN G

The high productivity and structure provided by giant kelp supports numerous species,
many of which are or have been harvested from prehistoric times (Lotze et al. 2011) to
the present. The commercial catch in or very near kelp forests, however, is difficult to
assess accurately because most species also occur on rocky reefs too deep to support
kelp. Moreover, although giant kelp stands generally dominate shallow rocky reefs in
central and northern California, kelp forests are generally more discontinuous in other
regions so landings are more difficult to associate directly with giant kelp habitat. This
is further complicated by a paucity of catch records or area-specific data in many regions.
Nevertheless, it is clear that kelp forests constitute an important habitat for commercial

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

25 1

fish and shellfish species. Commercial fishers in California currently fish in and around
kelp forests primarily for lobster, sea urchins, and a variety of fish (see above), the latter
increasingly for the live fish market (Leet et al. 2001). The topic of inshore fisheries with
all of its ramifications, regulations, and management could fi ll a volume. There is also
considerable concern about historical overfishing, the consequent reduction in abundances and sizes of key species, and effects of their decline on kelp forest ecosystems
(e.g., Tegner and Dayton 2000). Dayton et al. (1998) highlighted many of the declines in
fish abundances and the fact that there are sliding baselines for gauging what a natural
marine system would be like without excess fishing and multiple other anthropogenic
stressors. Here, we briefly discuss some of the major features of commercial fisheries
associated with giant kelp in California and elsewhere. Management relating to overfishing and kelp is discussed in Chapter 12.

C A L IFO R NI A K EL P - A S S O C I AT ED FISHER IE S

Mason (2004) analyzed commercial landings from California waters over a period of
74 years from 1928. Historically, rockfish (genus Sebastes) constituted most of the kelpassociated catch along California from the mid-1970s to the late 1980s, peaking at around
12,000 metric tons annually. By 2000, however, rockfish catches had declined to 12% of
their 1980s average and by 2003 were only a small proportion of the commercial fishery.
California sheephead (Semicossyphus pulcher), another inshore species that is common
within giant kelp forests, has been fished commercially since the early 1900s, with several
peaks of commercial landings (figure 11.7). One was around 160 metric tons in the late
1920s, another at 120 metric tons in the mid-1940s, and another at around 160 metric tons
again during the 1990s, after which landings declined (Alonzo et al. 2004). This fishing
has reduced the average sizes of sheephead and affected their life history traits and demographics (Caselle et al. 2011). The live fish trade has greatly expanded and, by the late 1990s,
the live fishery for California sheephead accounted for over 70% of the total landings of
this species (Stephens 2001). Together, the landings of this suite of nearshore species have
declined considerably since the 1980s (figure 11.6) and there are many management measures in place, including closures, seasonal fishing, and depth restrictions (see above).
Invertebrate fisheries have a long history in California, especially those for spiny
lobsters and abalone. The California spiny lobster Panulirus interruptus has been
fished since the early 1900s. From around 1920–1940, annual catches averaged about
182 metric tons (CDFW 2014b; figure 11.7). This more than doubled in the early 1950s,
declined to the early 1970s, and then increased to the late 1990s. The 2013 landing of
this species was 351 metric tons. A new fishery management plan is being developed for
spiny lobsters, which will evaluate integration of marine protected areas and different
fishing techniques into the management of the lobster fishery (CDFG 2011).
The fishery for sea urchins escalated massively after 1970 (figure 11.7; Kato 1972).
Both the red urchin Strongylocentrotus franciscanus and purple urchins S. purpuratus are

25 2

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

400

25,000
Lobster
Sheephead
Total urchins

20,000

300

15,000

200

10,000

100

5000

Urchin landings (mt)

Lobster, sheephead landings (mt)

500

0
0
1914 1924 1934 1944 1954 1964 1974 1984 1994 2004 2014
figure 11.7
Landings of California spiny lobsters (Panulirus interruptus), California sheephead (Semicossyphus
pulcher), and sea urchins (combined totals for purple urchins, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, and red
urchins, S. franciscanus).
source: Data from the California Department of Fish and Wildlife 2014 (data available on their website).

fished commercially, but red urchins constitute around 99% of the catch. The roe from
urchins is processed and sold mostly in Japan (Kramer and Nordin 1979, Reynolds and
Wilen 2000). Because urchins are harvested by divers, landings can be quite variable
among years due to sea conditions; they tend to be lower during El Niño periods when
seas are rough for long periods of time. This fishery peaked at around 24,000 metric
tons in the late 1980s and is currently around 6000 metric tons. This fishery was
seen as somewhat of a replacement for the declining fishery for abalone in California,
and many of the same fishers were involved in both of these fisheries. The removal of
urchins in this fishery has been viewed by some as a substitute for the predation effects
of sea otters, thereby allowing kelp forests to persist (see Chapter 12). Although this
conclusion is contentious, there is no doubt that vast numbers of urchins are removed
annually in and around kelp forests, particularly in southern California.
The fishery for abalone in California is a classic example of serial depletion. Because
abalone tend to be so visible on reefs and are collected by hand, fishers get very good
at finding them until populations are at very low levels and it takes considerable effort
to find the remaining few. One species after another was fished until populations of
all five of them were in severe decline and no longer commercially viable (fi gure 11.8).
Red abalone, Haliotis rufescens, was fished commercially for most of the 20th century,
peaking at around 1900 metric tons in 1935. The fishery peaked again after World War

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

25 3

Abalone, commercial landings (kg x 1000), California

2000

1500

Red
Pink
Green

1000

White
Black

500

0
1915

1925

1935

1945

1955

1965

1975

1985

1995

figure 11.8
Commercial landings of five species of abalone that were sequentially fished in southern California.
source: Data from California Department of Fish and Wildlife, and Foster and Schiel’s (2010) analysis.

II and went into decline from the mid-1960s. From the mid-1970s onward, landings
hovered around 200 metric tons until the decline in the mid-1990s. Pink abalone (H.
corrugata) was fished from the early 1950s and was depleted by the early 1990s. The
other species of abalone were boom-and-bust fishing, with sharp peaks and precipitous
declines. Up to 43% of the total catch of white abalone (H. sorenseni) was taken in a single
year (Karpov et al. 2000, Hobday et al. 2001).
It is clear that overfishing was the major cause of the decline of abalone in areas
not reoccupied by sea otters. Minimum size limits, which are meant to allow species
to grow to reproductive size and release gametes, thereby sustaining populations, were
clearly a failure. In 1997, all commercial and recreational fishing of abalone south of San
Francisco was banned (Karpov et al. 2000, Rogers-Bennett et al. 2002). A combination
of illegal fishing, disease, habitat loss, recruitment failure, and climate variability were
contributing factors to the decline of abalone species, as well as predation by sea otters in
central California (Hobday et al. 2001, Tegner et al. 2001). For example, black abalone,
H. cracherodii, suffered massive mortalities from disease from the mid-1980s onward
(Lafferty and Kuris 1993, Neuman et al. 2010). This was caused by a pathogen that led to
a wasting disease called “withering syndrome.” Raimondi et al. (2002) speculated that
the spread of the disease was related to increased temperatures associated with El Niño
events. The timing of the initiation of mortalities coincided with the strong El Niño
in 1982–1983 and also occurred as an isolated outbreak in Diablo Cove, north of Point
Conception, following warm-water discharge from a power plant (cf. Schiel et al. 2004).

25 4

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

Around 95% of black abalone south of Monterey in central California died (Neuman et
al. 2010). The spread of withering syndrome is now known to be enhanced by periods
of ocean warming. Neuman et al. (2010) identified this disease as a continuing threat
to black abalone. Black abalone was listed as endangered under the U. S. Endangered
Species Act by the U. S. National Marine Fisheries Service in 2009. Another species, the
white abalone H. sorenseni, underwent massive declines in numbers. Davis et al. (1996)
reported that this deep-water abalone, normally found from around 25 to 65 m depth,
was found in high densities at the Channel Islands in the early 1970s but had virtually
disappeared by the early 1990s, so much so that some were concerned about the possibility of extinction (Tegner et al. 1996, Davis et al. 1998). More recent surveys have
shown that the total population is larger than previously reported because more habitat
was surveyed, although white abalone are still orders of magnitude less abundant than
indicated in historical estimates (Butler et al. 2006). In 2001, this species became the
first invertebrate to be listed as endangered under the U. S. Endangered Species Act.
Abalone, particularly H. rufescens, continue to be fished commercially along the Pacific
Coast of Baja California, Mexico, and, as discussed above, there is still a recreational
fishery allowed in some areas of the California coastline.

GI A N T K EL P - A S S O C I AT ED FISHER IE S EL SE W HER E

Commercial fishing associated with giant kelp forests in other regions of the world
varies, depending on the extent of kelp forests and their accessibility. Chilean kelp forests are inhabited by many species of commercial and recreational importance, including the Chilean “abalone,” Concholepas concholepas (“loco,” a carnivorous muricid), the
sheephead, Semicossyphus darwini (“pejeperro”), and the sea chubs Graus nigra (“vieja
negra”) and Medialuna ancietae (“acha”). These and other species are commonly taken
by divers, either by hand or by spear fishing (Castilla and Fernandez 1998, Godoy et al.
2010; see “Recreational Use” above). Concholepas, however, is one of the most important
commercial species associated with kelp in Chile. This fishery was a main impetus for
inclusion of Management and Exploitation Areas for Benthic Resources (MEABRs) in
the Fishery and Aquaculture Law of 1991, which regulated benthic and pelagic coastal
resources by artisanal fishers. This history of this fishery has been described by Castilla
and Gelcich (2008). This fishery was sustained from 1960 to 1974 at between 3000
and 6000 metric tons, but was severely overfished at up to around 25,000 metric tons
in 1980. Since the management plan came into being, which included territorial user
rights for fisheries (TURFS), the fishery fluctuated between 2000 and 5000 metric tons
and seems to be sustainable at this higher level. Castilla and Gelcich (2008) pointed out
that loco has been the most important species to be harvested from MEABRs, accounting for around 30–60% of fish landings, and that the numerous fishers who participate
in this fishery attach important non-economic values to it, such as pride, accountability,
and cultural values.

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

255

Similar cultural and non-economic values are attached to New Zealand abalone,
Haliotis iris, which is fished at around 1200 metric tons annually under a commercial
quota management system. This species, however, is not particularly common in giant
kelp forests but instead occupies shallower inshore areas (Schiel et al. 1995). There is
also an extensive and large fishery for greenlip (H. laevigata) and blacklip (H. rubra) abalone in Australia, but, again, these are not particularly associated with giant kelp forests.
The rock lobster Jasus edwardsii has constituted important fisheries in New Zealand and
Australia for much of the 20th century. This species is not particularly associated with
giant kelp forests in New Zealand, but there is an important kelp-associated fishery in
Tasmania and South Australia (Barrett et al. 2009; see Chapter 12). Hamon et al. (2009)
reviewed the history of this species and its management in Tasmania. Tasmanian lobsters have been fished for over 200 years and first came under regulated management in
1889. The fishery eventually increased to >2000 metric tons by the 1980s and declined
to a historically low level of around 1400 metric tons in 1994. An individual transferable
quota system was introduced in the late 1990s and catches have stabilized at around
1500 metric tons. There are still some concerns about this fishery with the regression
of kelp stands in eastern Tasmania and an extensive loss of habitat (see Chapter 12).

OTHE R U S E S

It is noteworthy that the inspirational or even spiritual aspects of giant kelp forests have
received increasing attention in modern times. This is not only by indigenous people,
such as the New Zealand Maori who speak of the “mauri” or life force of the sea, and
“kaitiakitanga” or humans as guardians who must assist in protecting the environment
and its life forces. These aspects are seen in most areas of the world, as exemplified in
the poem “Enigmas” by Chilean poet Pablo Neruda:
You’ve asked me what the lobster is weaving
there with his golden feet?
I reply, the ocean knows this.
You say, what is the ascidia waiting for in its transparent bell?
What is it waiting for?
I tell you it is waiting for time, like you.
You ask me whom the Macrocystis alga hugs in its arms?
Study, study it, at a certain hour, in a certain sea I know.
For most people the charisma of giant kelp pales in comparison to whales and sea
otters, but the plants and forests themselves have achieved a certain cultural significance. Historically, the abundant human food available in giant and other kelp forests
may have influenced the migration routes of the first maritime peoples from Asia to
the west coast of the Americas in the late Pleistocene (Erlandson et al. 2007). Giant
kelp and its forests continue to inspire poets and artists, stimulate public interest and

25 6

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

“The Macrocystis pyrifera of the great Pacific kelp forest
is the world’s fastest-growing plant. You may know it by
its common name—the giant bladder kelp.”

figure 11.9
Macrocystis cartoon and logos. Cartoon is drawn by Booth for New Yorker
magazine, 1984. The Western Society
of Naturalists© is one of the oldest scientific societies on the west coast of the
United States. Members are primarily
marine scientists (www.westsocnat.
com). The Monterey Bay Aquarium is
a large public aquarium in Monterey,
California. Both logos are based on the
growing end of a frond.

aquarium displays (figure 11.5), and enhance trips to the beach. The most common art
is made from portions of fronds pressed onto thick paper and mounted to hang like
pictures. Stipes are woven and dried to make decorative baskets and other objects. Artistic renditions are used as logos and Macrocystis has even become the stuff of cartoons
(figure 11.9). Giant kelp forests were recognized for their “beauty and complexity” in a
set of stamps issued by the United States Postal Service in 2008 (figure 11.10), and the
Kelp’thar Forest is visited by millions as a featured habitat in Vashj’ir, an underwater
zone in the online game World of Warcraft (www.wowwiki.com/Kelp’thar_Forest).
Public interest and aquarium attendance have been increased by exhibiting live
plants and kelp forests, exhibits pioneered by the Monterey Bay Aquarium with a 30 m
tall, 1.25 × 106 L display tank that includes a surge machine (figure 11.5). Live plants are
now displayed in numerous other aquaria in the United States, as well as the National
Museum of Marine Biology and Aquarium in Taiwan where adult plants must be
imported from overseas. Given the difficulties of obtaining and maintaining live plants
at locations remote from natural sources, a few companies now produce plastic giant
kelp that can be ordered to size (e.g., several companies have elaborate displays on their

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

25 7

figure 11.10
U. S. Postal Service© kelp forest stamp set. The stamps are various parts of the drawing that can be peeled off
and used for postage, each indicated by “USA 44.” Note the densely populated and diverse community depicted
above and below the sea surface.

internet sites). Various parts of the plants can also be obtained separately and “snapped”
together. Anticipating that Macrocystis will be part of an exhibit including animals,
some of this artificial kelp is marketed as “seal and penguin resistant” (Living Color
2012). Giant kelp wrack becomes the stuff of play at the beach, serving as whips and
impromptu decorations for sand sculptures. For those wishing for longer-range interactions, floats from fresh wrack can be used as ammunition for a giant kelp blowgun, a
short length of PVC pipe with about 2 cm internal diameter. Eye protection is recommended for live targets.
Importantly, kelp forests are great laboratories for education about the wonders and
workings of nature. Giant kelp forests are used to train and inspire undergraduate and
postgraduate students in focused, field-oriented university courses, usually entitled
“Kelp Forest Ecology” or “Subtidal Ecology” (review in Pearse et al. 2013). The primary
objectives of courses in California are to introduce students to the natural history and
ecology of giant kelp forests using field observations, sampling, and, in some cases, individual or group research projects. Students must be certified divers and the fieldwork,

25 8

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

like all in situ research, requires surmounting various logistical and regulatory hurdles.
The resulting knowledge and experience is well worth the effort; some students have
become kelp forest biologists and ecologists as a result, and many others benefit simply
by experiencing an extraordinarily rich and diverse habitat. Furthermore, when courses
are offered consistently over many years, the data obtained from sampling by students
can be an important contribution to understanding kelp forest dynamics.

R E S TO R ATI O N O F K E LP FO R E S T S

Attempts at restoring former forests and creating new ones began in the late 1950s,
stimulated by the severe reduction in size of the two of the largest stands of giant kelp
in California, the Palos Verdes forest near Los Angeles and the Point Loma forest off
San Diego. These declines were associated with increased ocean sewage discharge and
coastal development related to rapidly growing urban populations, and an intense El
Niño (Foster and Schiel 2010). The largest restoration project was the Kelp Habitat
Improvement Project under the direction of Wheeler North (review in North 1976).
Kelco, the largest kelp harvesting company at the time, also endeavored to increase
Macrocystis abundance, particularly in the Point Loma area close to their processing
plant. Later restoration activities were undertaken by the California Department of Fish
and Game (e.g., Wilson and McPeak 1983), including efforts to restore giant kelp to areas
north of Santa Barbara that were deforested by extreme storms during the 1982–1983
El Niño (Schiel and Foster 1992). More recent restoration efforts in southern California
have been supported by the U. S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) as part of a settlement related to environmental damage due to the discharge
of DDT by Montrose Chemical Corporation (NOAA 2012).
The first consideration in any restoration effort is identifying the cause of the decline
(Schiel and Foster 1992). If, as has been the case in many areas, the cause is deterioration of water quality, such as increased turbidity or increased sedimentation, then
reintroducing giant kelp will not be successful unless the physical and chemical environment is restored so that it is conducive to the growth and reproduction of Macrocystis
and associated species. If these general improvements are made, however, it is likely that
kelp will recover naturally, particularly if there is a natural source of spores nearby. For
example, even though transplanting kelp and removing sea urchins may have helped,
the kelp forests at Palos Verdes and Point Loma recovered rapidly when sewage effluent
quality improved and outfalls were moved further offshore (Foster and Schiel 2010).
Unfortunately, kelp forests around large urban areas such as San Diego and Los Angeles
have ongoing legacy effects, and poor water quality and accumulated sediments from
coastal development may still be impeding the recovery of local kelp forests to their
historical levels.
Even in local areas where sea urchin grazing has reduced the size of forests,
the ultimate cause may be a decline in habitat quality that reduces kelp abundance,

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

259

inducing indirect effects by altering the foraging behavior of sea urchins. The common
sea urchins in California, Strongylocentrotus franciscanus and S. purpuratus, shift from
passive feeding on captured drift algae to active foraging on attached plants when kelp
abundance declines (e.g., Harrold and Reed 1985). Sea urchin removal alone may not
be successful, or necessary: if the quality of habitat is restored and giant kelp is likely to
recolonize naturally from nearby sources, it is conceivable that kelp restoration could be
accelerated by inducing a shift in urchin feeding from active back to passive by adding
drift algae or other food. This occurs naturally (Duggins 1981). In any case, attempts at
restoring giant kelp forests have been fraught with difficulties that highlight the complexities of hysteresis of natural ecosystems that have been compromised or eliminated.
If one assumes that sea urchin grazing alone is reducing kelp forest size and that
this is an un-natural, indirect result of a reduction in sea urchin predators such as
some fish and lobsters from fishing (e.g., Jackson et al. 2001; discussed in Chapter 9),
then marine protected areas or other forms of fishery regulation can be an effective
restoration method if they result in an increase in these predators. The clearest example
where this is the case is in Tasmanian giant kelp forests where changes in ocean climate
caused a range extension of the sea urchin Centrostephanus rodgersii which, combined
with other factors, resulted in severe deforestation. These sea urchins are eaten by the
lobster Jasus edwardsii, and deforestation is inhibited in some areas where the lobster is
protected from fishing (Ling et al. 2009; see Chapter 12).
Several methods of giant kelp seeding and transplanting have been used in attempts
to enhance recolonization, most of which are reviewed by North (1976). As for farming
discussed above, the giant kelp life history offers several choices. Spores can be provided
by attaching mesh bags of fertile sporophylls to the bottom (Hernández-Carmona et al.
2000), and microscopic stages can be grown in the laboratory and dispersed over the
bottom. The success of approaches using microscopic stages, however, is dependent on
having suitable benthic conditions for attachment, reproduction, and / or development
of the life history stage used. Creating suitable benthic conditions may include removing understory algae if they are inhibiting giant kelp recruitment (Hernández-Carmona
et al. 2000). As discussed in Chapter 3, such conditions may occur only sporadically
and may be difficult to predict. An alternative to the equivalent of seeding is to grow
small sporophytes (<1 cm tall) on artificial substrata in the laboratory and then place the
substrata in the field (Vásquez et al. 2014), or transplant the much larger juvenile and
adult sporophytes that are not as influenced by bottom conditions. Transplantation is
much more labor intensive because the plants must be collected, transported to the restoration site, and individually attached to the bottom. Juveniles are much easier to transplant than adults, and can be attached to the “stumps” (holdfasts plus short sections of
the stipes) of understory kelps after upper portions have been removed (HernándezCarmona et al. 2000). The scale of transplantation is important because small transplanted stands may be consumed by grazing fishes (North 1976). The survival of
transplants in areas with abundant sea urchins can be enhanced by surrounding the

26 0

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

transplants with strips of plastic that wave over the bottom. The whiplash and “touch” of
the strips apparently cause urchins to move away (Vásquez and McPeak 1998). Timing
is also important as storms may remove plants before they securely attach. So far, most,
if not all, of these transplanting efforts have failed. As previously stated, none are likely
to be effective unless the causes of the original decline are eliminated. Furthermore,
transplanting large areas requires enormous effort, plants are relatively short-lived, and
unless growing conditions improve a transplanted population is not sustainable.

AR TIFI CIAL R E E F S , CR E ATI ON O F NE W KE LP FO R E S T S ,
AND “MITI G ATI O N”

Artificial reefs placed on a sand bottom are used to produce new kelp forests in California. Initial efforts at producing artificial reefs looked more like rubbish disposal than
anything that could be construed as natural habitat. Materials such as old streetcars
and tires were dumped into the ocean primarily to provide fish habitat and enhance
fishing opportunities, and a few of these small reefs were colonized by giant kelp (Lewis
and McKee 1989). Since the early 1980s, there has been demand, at least in California, to “mitigate” anthropogenic impacts along the coastline by providing new habitat
as compensation for damage. In particular, this has occurred with respect to power
plants, which draw a large amount of seawater into their cooling intakes, through heat
exchangers and back into the ocean (see Chapter 10). The major focal areas of this have
been at the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS) near San Clemente in
southern California and the Diablo Canyon Power Plant (DCPP) near Avila Beach in
central California. Various forms of mitigation have occurred or been proposed, but the
main efforts have been in the creation of artificial reefs to provide new kelp forest habitat
(Carter, Jessee, et al. 1985, Ambrose 1994, Reed et al. 2004, Reed et al. 2006—“An
experimental investigation”). These have met with mixed success over the years because
of differences in overall size, depths, and configuration, but reef designs are now far
more effective than they were originally in being suitable for their intended purpose of
supporting giant kelp forests and associated communities.
The first of these “mitigation” artificial reefs was Pendleton Artificial Reef (PAR)
in 1980, which comprised 1.4 ha of quarry rock deposited as eight modules on a sand
bottom at around 11 m depth and situated 5–6 km from the nearest kelp forest (Carter,
Carpenter, et al. 1985). Giant kelp, the understory kelp Pterygophora californica, and
abalone (Haliotis rufescens) were transplanted to the reef in efforts to establish a kelp
forest rapidly. Unfortunately, the results were not those intended. Herbivorous fishes
(halfmoon Medialuna californiensis and opaleye Girella nigricans) were attracted to the
isolated modules and ate the kelp. Abalone did not survive, most likely due to lack of
food and consumption by predators (Carter, Jessee, et al. 1985). Since then, giant kelp
has occasionally colonized PAR, but the modules have not developed a giant kelp community similar to nearby natural reefs. It was concluded that this initial attempt at

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

261

figure 11.11
Satellite images of the surface canopy of giant kelp on Wheeler North Reef, off southern California.
Left: canopy on experimental modules (dark spots) in 2003 from SPOT satellite (10 m resolution).
Right: canopy on the completed reef in 2010 from color-corrected Landsat image (30 m resolution).
AR = experimental artificial reef modules. SM = San Mateo kelp forest, a natural forest adjacent to the artificial reef. “Wheeler North” = completed Wheeler North Reef. “San Mateo” = San Mateo kelp forest.
notes: Note the variation in the extent of the San Mateo kelp canopy between years. The distance between
AR and SM in left image is approximately 3 km.
source: Left image courtesy of Google Earth from the United States Geological Survey. Right image courtesy of D. Reed.

production of a kelp community did not accomplish its aims because of isolation of the
modules from other reefs, their placement in an area where light is not always favorable
to kelp growth, and the high relief of the modules (Carter, Jessee, et al. 1985, Ambrose
1994).
Subsequent installations of artificial reefs have proven to be more successful. Based
on PAR and other assessments of conditions likely to produce kelp forests on artificial
reefs that resembled natural forests, a new design was developed for the construction of
what is now called Wheeler North Reef (WNR) as mitigation for “loss of habitat” related
to the discharge from SONGS. This reef, a series of modules spaced along the coastline
of southern California north of San Diego, was installed as a large-scale experiment.
WNR was placed on a mostly sand bottom 500 m northwest of a natural kelp forest
at depth of 13–16 m. Construction occurred in two phases. In 1999, Phase I placed
56 modules, each with an area of 1600 m2, in seven experimental groups to evaluate the
effects of substratum type (rock versus concrete), substratum size (boulder vs. rubble),
and bottom cover (Reed et al. 2004, Reed et al. 2006—“An experimental investigation”, Reed et al. 2006—“Quantitative assessment”; figure 11.11). The vertical relief of all
modules was <1 m, to obviate the problems experienced at PAR. The modules continue
to be monitored since placement. Macrocystis colonized via spores from the natural
forest within 6 months, and within 2 years produced a dense surface canopy on each
module that has persisted (figure 11.11). The reef was completed (Phase II) in 2008 by
placing rock around the experimental modules to create a reef area of 61 ha. Giant kelp

26 2

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

colonized the new rock (figure 11.11) and monitoring has continued to evaluate how well
WNR meets established performance standards used to determine whether it successfully mitigates for the kelp forest habitat destroyed by the discharge from the power
plant. Results so far have been encouraging (UCSB 2012). This project exemplifies the
value of clear objectives and rigorous experiments and assessments to the success of
artificial reefs. The scale, planning, construction, and evaluation of such a reef, however, do not come cheaply. The California Coastal Commission, the state agency overseeing the project, estimated the total cost of construction and ongoing monitoring to be
in the order of US $50 million (UCSB 2012, California Coastal Commission reports),
which is being paid by the owners of the power plant.
Giant kelp forests, like their terrestrial analogues, are clearly “forests of many uses”
that enhance human experience and commerce, especially when they occur near heavily populated coasts, and their resources are economically important. Use can lead to
abuse, however, as has occurred when forests are used as disposal sites for sewage and
runoff (discussed in Chapter 10) or when resources are extracted without regulations
that ensure sustainability (Chapter 12). No doubt, future uses will require continued
evaluation, particularly in areas most affected by changes in ocean climate (Chapter
13) where currently benign activities may become cumulative multiple stressors. One
hope is that the greatest benefit of marine protected areas (Chapter 12), which include
protection of water and benthic quality, will be to preserve some giant kelp forests in as
natural a state as possible.

HUMAN USAGE OF GIANT KELP AND KELP FOREST ORGANISMS

•

263

This page intentionally left blank

12
MARINE PROTECTED AREAS
AND FISHERIES EFFECTS
We have been gambling with the future by establishing a poor balance between
short-term profit and long-term risks. The absence of meaningful, fully
protected reserves has produced a situation in which there are virtually no
areas north of the Antarctic in the world’s oceans that have exploitable
resources where scientists can study natural marine systems.
—Dayton et al. (2000)

Although numerous reviews and meta-analyses have built the case for
increased use of PAs (protected areas) . . ., few have dealt with failures of PAs
or with the general effectiveness of PAs at halting global biodiversity loss.
Evaluation of the performance of PAs is critical since failure of PAs to protect
biodiversity could erode public and political support for conservation.
—Mora and Sale (2011)

If marine reserves and other MPAs are to provide significant conservation
benefits to species, they must be scaled up. . .. By aggregating the benefits of
multiple MPAs, the network can have larger impacts. More importantly, a
number of theoretical models suggest that networks can have emergent
benefits that make the network more than the sum of its individual parts.
—Gaines, White, et al. (2010)

There are many conservation, ethical, and societal reasons to implement marine protected areas (MPAs) (e.g., Airame et al. 2003), but MPAs and overfishing seem linked
like the Gemini twins, with perhaps fishing in the role of Castor (the mortal who perished before being revived) and MPAs in the role of Pollux (the immortal who came
to the rescue); if they are not actually bound together, they are at least within each
other’s gravitational pull. Although there are many human activities that have impacts
on marine areas (e.g., Sousa 2001, Schiel 2009, for reviews), fishing is the chief means
of extraction of organisms with potentially large impacts on the functioning of marine
ecosystems (e.g., Baum and Worm 2009). Of the thousands of publications on MPAs,

26 5

most mention the cessation of fishing as a principal avenue to restoration of function
(e.g., Davis 1989, Dugan and Davis 1993, Gell and Roberts 2003). Various types of
MPAs have been established worldwide for a wide variety of reasons, including prevention of overfishing, protection of species and habitats, preservation of special areas,
as insurance policies for large-scale impacts, as nurseries for exploited species, and to
restore trophic linkages and ecosystem functioning (Lauck et al. 1998, Babcock et al.
1999, Carr 2000, Syms and Carr 2001, Halpern and Warner 2002, Allison et al. 2003,
Gell and Roberts 2003, Lubchenco et al. 2003, Lester et al. 2009, Gaines, White, et al.
2010, Gaines, Lester, et al. 2010). The formation of MPAs has been a long-fought battle
by scientists and environmentalists (Ballantine and Langlois 2008) that now has considerable credence with a wide range of stakeholders, who have increasingly recognized
the stresses on coastal ecosystems and the need for some form of protection. In many
ways, however, MPAs are simple management tools, affording partial or full protection from exploitation of species and habitats within their borders. There is a diverse
and rich literature discussing their positive effects (Babcock et al. 1999, Murray et al.
1999, Halpern and Warner 2002, Shears and Babcock 2002, Lubchenco et al. 2003,
Shears and Babcock 2003, Lester et al. 2009, Gaines, White, et al. 2010, Gaines, Lester,
et al. 2010, Leleu et al. 2012), but there are also other tools in spatial and other forms of
management that require consideration (e.g., Mora and Sale 2011, Thrush and Dayton
2010).
It is interesting to note that two of the world’s first MPAs were established for the
purpose of scientific study (Ballantine and Gordon 1979, Fernández and Castilla 2005).
One of these, in northeastern New Zealand, had extensive urchin barren grounds at
the time of establishment in 1975 (Choat and Schiel 1982) and it has become one of
the world’s focal points for trophic changes following decades of protection (Babcock
et al. 2010). The prescience of a few pioneers of MPAs (e.g., Bill Ballantine [Ballantine
and Langois 2008] and Juan Carlos Castilla [Castilla and Duran 1985]; see also Murray
et al. 1999, Davis 2005) blossomed as an idea whose time had come, with increasing pressures on marine ecosystems worldwide and the apparent failure of traditional
management, especially of many fisheries. Early discussions about MPAs along coastlines where giant kelp are prominent focused particularly on urchin barren grounds,
overfishing, and the loss of function. In sometimes highly charged circumstances, the
benefits of MPAs to fishing, the so-called “spillover effect” of enhanced fishing outside
reserve boundaries (e.g., McClanahan and Mangi 2000, Halpern 2003, Halpern and
Warner 2003, Lester et al. 2009, Halpern et al. 2010), were argued as a benefit of MPAs,
but not to universal approval (Agardy et al. 2003). Although there is always a dynamic
tension between stakeholders in the marine environment, perhaps especially relating to
commercial and recreational fishers and environmentalists (Klein et al. 2008), there has
been a gradual societal shift toward the recognition of potential benefits of MPAs and
the idea that in the sea, as on the land, there is great merit in setting aside some areas
largely free from extraction and other forms of exploitation.

26 6

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

The focus now has shifted largely from the question of “are marine reserves worthwhile?” to “how can they best be implemented to gain maximal benefit?” This involves
questions of where to put them, how big they should be, how many are needed, and
how they should be spaced and networked along a coastline (Gaines et al. 2003,
Gaines, White, et al. 2010). In this chapter, MPAs are discussed with particular
reference to Macrocystis forests. Perforce, much of this discussion relates to California,
where the major MPAs with giant kelp occur and where the preponderance of MPA
research relating to Macrocystis forests has been done. There have been several compendia of papers to which readers may refer for a fuller treatment of MPA issues (Dayton
et al. 2000, Lubchenco et al. 2003, Babcock et al. 2010, Gaines, Lester, et al. 2010).
Below we present an overview of what MPAs are, their design and implementation,
fishing and other effects, and management beyond MPAs. Much of the theory and practice have been based on giant kelp forests, particularly along the west coast of North
America.

WHAT I S A MAR INE PR OTE C TE D AR E A ?

The definitions, types, and purposes of MPAs tend to vary by country and application,
and come in several varieties. The International Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN), an organization aimed at finding pragmatic solutions to the world’s environmental and development challenges, defines a protected area as “A clearly defined geographical space, recognised, dedicated and managed, through legal or other effective
means, to achieve the long-term conservation of nature with associated ecosystem services and cultural values” (http://www.iucn.org/). Under this, they define six management categories, ranging from full protection to protected areas with sustainable use
of resources (Day et al. 2012). The IUCN defines MPAs as “Any area of the intertidal or
subtidal terrain, together with its overlying water and associated flora, fauna, historical and cultural features, which has been reserved by law or other effective means to
protect part or all of the enclosed environment.” The Convention on Biological Diversity
extends MPAs as “Marine and Coastal Protected Areas” to include both coastal areas
and areas that cross the land–sea interface such as estuaries and marine salt marshes.
These constitute “an area within or adjacent to the marine environment, together with
its overlying waters and associated flora, fauna, and historical and cultural features,
which has been reserved by legislation or other effective means, including custom, with
the effect that its marine and / or coastal biodiversity enjoys a higher level of protection
than its surroundings.”
There are considerable issues worldwide in what does or does not constitute an MPA.
Day et al. (2012), for the IUCN, outline the critical issues relating to the defi nition and
functions of MPAs. Among others, conservation must be the main priority and they
must have precise boundaries and legally defined zones. Day et al. pointed out that other
forms of management may overlap with the intentions of MPAs but have quite different

MARINE PROTECTED AREAS AND FISHERIES EFFECTS

•

267

objectives. For example, the ecosystem-based approach advocated by the Convention on
Biological Diversity has a principle that land and water management should contribute
to conservation. According to the IUCN, the critical criterion is whether nature conservation is the primary objective. Therefore, fisheries management areas, community
areas set aside for sustainable harvest of marine products, and areas set aside for other
purposes, such as military use or pipeline protection, are not MPAs. Furthermore, it is
expected that MPAs should be managed in perpetuity and not as short-term or temporary management strategies.
Because they are enacted on a country-by-country, and sometimes state-by-state,
basis, MPA legislation is tailored to particular circumstances. One of the earliest pieces
of legislation designating MPAs was the Marine Reserves Act 1971 of New Zealand
(http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1971/0015/latest/DLM397838.html). This
was enacted “for the purpose of preserving, as marine reserves for the scientific study
of marine life, areas of New Zealand that contain underwater scenery, natural features,
or marine life, of such distinctive quality, or so typical, or beautiful, or unique, that their
continued preservation is in the national interest,” and the public were guaranteed to
have right of entry. It is interesting to note the key element of “scientific study,” a feature which infuses much of subsequent legislation, either directly or implicitly through
management and monitoring (e.g., see Dayton quote at start of this Chapter). Even in a
conservation-oriented country like New Zealand, MPAs of various types protect around
7% of New Zealand’s territorial waters, with 99% of this area being within two large
offshore, deep-water marine reserves, and a total of only 0.31% of the exclusive economic
zone is being managed under MPA legislation (Department of Conservation and Ministry of Fisheries 2005, Bess and Rallapudi 2007).
Legislation for establishment of MPAs in the United States was enacted in 2000 by
United States Executive Order 13158 (http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/101568), designating them as “any area of the marine environment that has been reserved by federal,
state, tribal, territorial, or local laws or regulations to provide lasting protection for part
or all of the natural and cultural resources therein.” Their designated purpose is to “help
protect the significant natural and cultural resources within the marine environment
for the benefit of present and future generations by strengthening and expanding the
Nation’s system of marine protected areas,” and included science-based identification
and prioritization of natural and cultural resources for additional protection as well as
ecological assessments of linkages between MPAs. In California, where the greatest
number of MPAs encompassing giant kelp occurs, the setup and administration of
protected areas come under the ambit of the California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW; until January 1, 2013, it was called the California Department of Fish and
Game). The California State Legislature passed the Marine Life Protection Act in 1999
that required CDFW to “increase its coherence and effectiveness at protecting the state’s
marine life, habitats, and ecosystems” (California Department of Fish and Wildlife
2013). This included three types of MPA designation (state marine reserve, state marine

26 8

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

conservation area, and state marine park) as well as other types of management areas.
MPAs are developed regionally in the north, north-central, central, and southern parts
of the state. There is a very extensive network of hundreds of protected areas of various
types covering numerous habitats and ecosystems.
Similarly, MPAs in Australia were enacted to be “parts of the ocean that are managed
primarily for the conservation of their ecosystems, habitats and the marine life they
support” and to include a network of Australia’s different marine habitats and marine
ecosystems (http://www.environment.gov.au/marinereserves/overview.html). Australia
purports to have the largest marine reserve network in the world, with 60 covering
3.1 million square kilometers. Fernández and Castilla (2005) reviewed the progress and
impediments to establishing MPAs in Chile. Unlike most other areas of the world, they
reported that 11 of 27 natural sanctuaries were sponsored and administered by private
organizations, with these beginning as early as 1941 in a concession of 0.013 km2 to
the University of Valparaiso for research. Management and exploitation areas, rather
than those with full protection, represent the great majority (around 97%) of reserves
in Chile.

D E S I GN AND IMP LE ME NTATI O N

A great deal of research has been done on the optimal design, size, and spacing of marine
reserves. Because they occur in largely open coastlines, their effectiveness depends to a
great extent on flows and connectivity through hydrographic processes, species movement patterns, larval drift and retention, and so, to a great extent, on their spacing and
the condition of the surrounding habitats (e.g., Allison et al. 1998). Dayton et al. (2000)
pointed out that the main objectives of coastal zone management are conservation, the
maintenance of biodiversity and intrinsic ecosystem services, and maintenance of sustainable fisheries. These and other objectives of MPAs factor critically in their design.
The primary purpose of MPAs may be to conserve, but the implicit objectives are to
rehabilitate areas and return them to full function. This is challenging enough when
considering sessile and locally mobile species, but becomes even more difficult when
considering highly mobile fishes. There are also economic and social dimensions in the
design and implementation of MPAs, particularly where fishing and long-term usage
have been well established (Castilla 1999).
It was recognized early that the effectiveness of marine reserves as a conservation
tool would have limitations because oceanographic processes that influence dispersal
and population replenishment and human impacts such as oil spills often occur over
much larger scales than reserves can accommodate (Allison et al. 1998). Kinlan and
Gaines (2003) assessed the differences in long-distance dispersal (LDD) of several key
taxa in California coastal communities and found that LDD ranged from meters to
hundreds of kilometers, with fish and some invertebrates clustering at the high end and
macroalgae at the lower end of dispersal ranges. Kinlan et al. (2005) further pointed

MARINE PROTECTED AREAS AND FISHERIES EFFECTS

•

26 9

out that few organisms could be simply classified as short or long dispersers and that
dispersal must be defined only with respect to the explicit definitions of the scale and
process of interest. Similarly, Shanks et al. (2003) examined dispersal distance and time
spent dispersing for 25 taxa for which data were available, including Macrocystis and
several macroalgae, tunicates, bryozoans, molluscs, and crustaceans. Like Kinlan and
Gaines, they found that dispersal ranged from meters to thousands of kilometers. Based
on their analyses, they recommended that a reserve between 4 and 6 km in diameter
should be large enough to retain larvae of short-distance dispersers and that reserves
should be spaced 1–20 km apart so that they are close enough to capture propagules of
distant dispersers from adjacent reserves.
Carr and Reed (1993), in considering giant kelp forests, pointed out that with respect to
fish and fisheries, the necessary size of a reserve will depend on the rate at which reserve
populations and those in the surrounding area supply new recruits. They distinguished
four modes of dispersal relevant to reserve design (figure 12.1). These included self-seeding
closed populations, single sources feeding many areas, many areas feeding larvae into a
large larval pool, and limited dispersal through stepping stones of nearby areas. Gaines et
al. (2003) provided some of the theoretical underpinnings for explicitly accounting for larval dispersal in marine reserve design. They found, perhaps unsurprisingly in retrospect,
that advection plays a dominant role in determining the effectiveness of reserve configuration, but the important consequences of this are that where currents are strong, several
reserves are far more effective than single reserves of the same total size and that reserves
can outperform traditional, effort-based strategies in terms of fisheries yields.
Others have explored the implications of reserves as fisheries management tools,
which was one of the original reasons for MPAs in California. Nowlis (2000) gives a
good perspective on this topic. He pointed out that closed-area management is an idea
that stretches back many decades (Beverton and Holt 1957) and that studies have repeatedly shown that the number and average sizes of fished species and the total number
of species increase within closed areas (e.g., Roberts and Polunin 1991, Dugan and
Davis 1993, Rowley 1994, Bohnsack 1996). Because marine reserves entail short-term
fisheries losses and are touted as a tool for rehabilitating populations, he examined these
effects with three models. His results indicated that if reserves are properly designed to
minimize spillover effects of adults and allow abundant larval transport, they can maximize fisheries harvests, at least for the groups he examined. Roberts (2000) pointed out
that, up to that point, the location of marine reserves depended more on social criteria and opportunity than on scientific study. He advocated the urgency of establishing
reserves on the basis of what is known rather than delay them until long-term studies
are done. He concluded that a network of interacting reserves should be established to
hedge bets against uncertainty and variability in ecological processes and in management, such as compliance, that can affect reserve performance.
A network of reserves was clearly needed to achieve the aims and objectives of protecting marine ecosystems. Lubchenco and colleagues (e.g., Lubchenco et al. 2003)

27 0

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

A. Closed population

B. Single source

C. Multiple source
Larval pool

D. Limited distance

figure 12.1
Schematic depiction of models of larval replenishment: (A) closed population, (B) single source, (C) multiple source, and (D) limited distance (see text
for details). Ellipses represent isolated adult populations. Solid lines indicate
high recruitment rates within and / or between isolated adult populations.
Broken lines indicate low recruitment rates.
source: From Carr and Reed (1993)

were not only strong advocates of MPAs but also did important underpinning work
on design, benefits, and implementation of reserves along the western United States
coast. Lubchenco et al. (2003) highlighted several features that came to dominate design
principles. These included the span of the network from end to end, the size, shape,
and number of individual reserve units, and their placement, which together determine
important features such as connectivity. To date, however, single isolated reserves still
comprise most of those globally (Lester et al. 2009).

MARINE PROTECTED AREAS AND FISHERIES EFFECTS

•

27 1

An interesting contrast to most previous studies on marine reserve design was provided by Parnell et al. (2006), who argued that single reserves are important. They
examined the issue of locating of a marine reserve and the requirements for size. They
presented a case study of the giant kelp forest at Point Loma, San Diego (one of the
longest-studied kelp beds in the world), in which they examined fine-scale habitats and
the species associated with them, mobility of adults, and the physical forcing affecting
the dynamics of the habitats. They argued there is an inherent “continuum of certainty”
in marine reserve design, with habitat quality and distribution within a reserve being
the most certain factors with respect to a broad range of species, and ecological links to
nearby or remote habitat via dispersal being less certain. They argue for the importance
of fine-scale approaches to defining habitats and their value for exploited species. Their
argument is essentially that reserves must be large enough to protect a self-sustaining
assemblage of exploited species, which they calculated to be around 42% of the kelp
forest at Point Loma.
The diversity of approaches, research, and even arguments within the scientific community highlight the importance of the issues and the various perspectives on solving
widespread marine problems. Layered on this, of course, is the spectrum of societal
involvement, from support to opposition, of sequestering portions of the marine environment in perpetuity, and also the various governmental agencies that can be involved.
Airame et al. (2003) discussed the marine reserve design at the Channel Islands, off
southern California. This reserve had goals relating to ecosystem biodiversity, sustainable fisheries, economic viability, natural and cultural heritage, and education; 11
federal, state, and local agencies had some jurisdiction in the planning region. Key to
working through issues was having a working group across agencies. Their analyses
included ecological criteria but, as in many other studies, they found that data were often
sparse in key areas and that a habitat-based approach could be effective in identifying
reserves based on individual species’ needs. The result of this process was that in 2003
the California Department of Fish and Game (= Wildlife) established a network of
10 no-take marine reserves and two conservation reserves with limited fishing allowed,
covering around 12% of state-controlled waters within the Channel Islands National
Marine Sanctuary. With expansion into federally controlled waters in 2007, the network
covers 488 km2 around five islands (Hamilton et al. 2010).
Klein et al. (2008) argued that a balance must be reached between conservation
and socioeconomic viability in reserve design. They discussed “consumptive” and
“nonconsumptive” interests of stakeholders, including divers, fishers, scientists, conservationists, and managers, in the design network for an area of central California.
The scientific advisory committee recommended the inclusion of habitats across five
depth zones from the intertidal zone to >200 m depth (CDFG 2005). The stakeholder
group adopted some of the scientific recommendations and added areas of biodiversity
and special significance to include in protected areas. They found that the expertise of
stakeholders, such as in providing data on fishing grounds (although these are often

27 2

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

not included in protected areas), was crucial to the design process, and concluded that
their inclusive approach would aid in the robustness of MPAs. In a more general sense,
Peterson et al. (2005) advocated the merits of argument, or at least an eagerness for
debate, among stakeholders rather than the power of consensus to achieve conservation
goals. However, anyone who has participated in multi-stakeholder meetings will know
that, whether or not a “strategic consensus around a common vision” is reached, there
is always what is often euphemistically called “lively debate.”
Many developing countries present particular challenges in marine conservation,
not least because of cultural values and the great degree of dependency of people on
local production of marine resources. Castilla and colleagues in Chile have discussed
the numerous issues involved, the benefits from even very localized protection of species and related functions, and the issues relating to enforcement (e.g., Castilla 1999,
2000, Fernández and Castilla 2005). This seems to be a case mostly of get what you
can where you can.

MPA E FFE C T S ON FI S H , FI S HE R IE S , AND CO MM UNITIE S

Many studies highlight the benefits of MPAs to fish and fisheries (references in the
reviews cited in the introduction to this chapter). In the great majority of fully protected,
no-take reserves, the sizes and abundances of formerly exploited species increase and
there are often increases in diversity and other community metrics (e.g., Gaines, White,
et al. 2010, Gaines, Lester, et al. 2010). These responses are both intuitive and encouraging, showing that real responses and benefits can accrue in relatively short time periods.
However, it is also known that responses among even nominally similar areas can be
quite variable, and the flow-on effects to lower trophic levels are far from clear in most
places. Furthermore, the occurrence and magnitude of spillover effects, where species
in protected areas enhance adjacent areas through the provision of settlers or strays that
wander outside reserve borders, are generally unclear. Within the context of giant kelp
forests and MPAs, the evidence for effects comes mostly from California and Tasmania.
It is these areas where there has been a conjunction of heavy exploitation of top predators,
formation of urchin barren grounds, and established MPAs. A great part of the impetus
for establishing reserves was not only the formation of urchins barren grounds, which
at first were suggested to possibly result from the elimination of sea otters from hunting (North and Pearse 1970), but also the coincident overfishing of many fish stocks
(e.g., Dayton et al. 1998, Tegner and Dayton 2000). The serial depletion of fisheries and
large fish (e.g., fishing down the food web, Pauly et al. 1998; loss of ecosystem services,
Worm et al. 2006) and the accumulation of detrimental effects (e.g., Dayton et al. 2000,
Thrush and Dayton 2010) have heightened the awareness that something is seriously
wrong and needs fi xing.
There is a long history of fisheries in and around the giant kelp forests of California.
Assessing the effects of protection from fishing, although a criterion of the benefits of

MARINE PROTECTED AREAS AND FISHERIES EFFECTS

•

27 3

MPA status, can be fraught with difficulties. Fish assemblages are highly associated with
habitat and specific seascape features, and therefore assessments inside and outside of
reserves must account for significant variations in habitat features. Furthermore, until
relatively recently there were not enough “replicate” reserves to compare within regional
networks. Therefore, comparisons of MPA with non-MPA areas could be confounded by
both varying habitats among reserve “treatments” and pseudo-replication at the treatment level. These caveats must be kept in mind in an evaluation of the evidence for MPA
effects as they are crucial to understanding both the average responses of particular
taxa but also their variation across the wider seascape. It has become fashionable to call
such variation “context dependency” (e.g., Shears et al. 2008), but this type of site-tosite variation has been known since the early days of ecology (often called a site ×
treatment effect in experiments). Fortunately, there are now networks of reserves in
many countries that will allow assessments of effects and variation, and therefore
are starting to provide a much more robust understanding of how, where, and to what
extent MPAs yield benefits to fish, fisheries, and the wider kelp forest ecosystem.
Gaines, Lester, et al. (2010) called this the “evolving science of marine reserves,” which
will undoubtedly provide many insights into the effectiveness of reserve networks for
meeting conservation, fishery, and commercial objectives in the years to come.

FISHER IE S EFFEC T S

Fish assemblages in nearshore waters of California are known to be highly associated with habitat features at several spatial scales. For example, Anderson and Yoklavich (2007) found this to be the case at a scale of kilometers, at which habitat strata
such as substratum type, depth, relief, and habitat patchiness were a strong predictor
of fish assemblage composition. At meters to hundreds of meters, individual species
were associated with specific habitat features, and at the scale of a meter or less species
could show microhabitat specificity. Yoklavich et al. (2002) examined a deep-water
(20–100 m) fish assemblage in an area protected from fishing for 4 years in central California using a submersible. They identified 70,000 fish from 82 taxa, 36 species of which
were rockfishes (Sebastes spp.) that comprised 93% of fishes within the Big Creek Marine
Ecological Reserve. They found there were four distinct assemblages, including associated fine sediments in deep water, bedrock with an uneven surface in deep water, sand
waves, and shell hash in shallow water, and boulders and biogenic habitats on rock in
shallow water. However, they found there were no differences in fish densities inside and
outside the reserve and no consistent differences in fish size. They attributed this lack of
significance to a combination of not enough time for the reserve to have had an effect on
long-lived fish species, the fact that the somewhat remote reserve might not have been
fished heavily anyway, and / or that the reserve might not have adequately protected some
of the highly mobile species. Similarly, Schroeder and Love (2002) compared fished and

274

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

unfished areas in southern California for the density and sizes of Sebastes spp., particularly with reference to the recreational fishery. One of their study areas, in Santa Monica
Bay, had been closed to commercial fishing since the 1950s but was open to some forms
of recreational fishing. Another site around an oil platform was essentially closed to all
fishing, and a third site was open to all fishing. The density of all rockfish was greatest
at the site open to all forms of fishing, although fishes were generally small and most
abundant at the site where fishing did not occur. Cowcod (Sebastes levis) abundance was
32 times greater, and bocaccio (S. paucispinis) were 408 times greater, in the closed area
than in the area where recreational fishing was allowed.
Hamilton et al. (2014) examined the dynamics of sheephead (Semicossyphus pulcher)
populations around the giant kelp forests of San Nicolas Island, southern California,
from the 1990s through a period including a decade of management intervention. They
used gut contents and stable isotope analyses to show that there was a niche expansion
after the period of recovery, related to a large shift in size structure (figure 12.2). They
found that in the early 1990s a rapid expansion of an unregulated commercial live-fish
fishery to supply the Asian market led to a decrease in sizes and in size at maturity.
Fisheries management regulations in the late 1990s addressed this and commercial
landings declined. They also found that large sheephead, which were mostly males, ate
more sea urchins, whereas smaller fish ate more barnacles, bivalves, and shrimp. They
concluded that these changes were due to changes in sizes and not in prey availability.
It was interesting to note that the density of sea urchins, the main agent of maintaining
urchin barrens putatively due to a reduction in top predators, did not vary significantly
among the periods, and average densities were similar or higher in the 2000s than
during the 1980s to early 1990s. The community effects detected in this study involved
increases in some sessile invertebrates (mostly the sea cucumber Pachythyone rubra
and tube-dwelling polychaetes), but not other macroinvertebrates, giant kelp, or foliose
red algae. In their careful analyses, the authors note that the community effects were
difficult to disentangle from environmental forcing, such as El Niño and the Pacific
Decadal Oscillation, and the foraging effects of other urchin predators, especially sea
otters, which were introduced to San Nicolas Island in the late 1980s.
The serial depletion of the abalone fishery over the course of a century was a major
focal point of concern about the status of the coastal marine environment and the need
for increased protection (Tegner 1993, Dayton et al. 2000, Dayton 2003). The very low
abundances of abalone in kelp forests was due to a combination of overfishing and the
return of sea otters to many areas of the coastline, particularly in central California (e.g.,
Dayton et al. 1998). Also, a combination of disease, illegal fishing, loss of habitat, failure
in recruitment, and variable climatic conditions has contributed to the decline of abalone
(Hobday et al. 2001, Tegner et al. 2001). There are now tight regulations on removing
these iconic species and all fishing of abalone south of San Francisco has been banned
since 1997 (Haaker et al. 2001, Rogers-Bennett et al. 2002; discussed in Chapter 11).

MARINE PROTECTED AREAS AND FISHERIES EFFECTS

•

27 5

A.

35,000

Landings (pounds)

30,000
25,000

Male

20,000
15,000

Female

10,000
5000
0
1992 1994

1996

1998

2000 2002

2004 2006 2008

Year
B.

25

1980

20
15
10
5
0
100
16
14

200

300

400

500

1998

Female
Male
Size at
maturation

12

Frequency

600

10
8
6

Size at
sex change

4
2
0

100
10

200

300

400

500

600

200

300

400

500

600

2007

8
6
4
2
0
100

Standard length (mm)
figure 12.2
Exploitation and recovery of California sheephead, S. pulcher, at San Nicolas Island off southern California. (A) Commercial landings from 1993 to 2007 from the study area, illustrating rapid exploitation and a subsequent decline in landings following management intervention (catch restrictions).
(B) Shifts in size structure of males and females, and changes in the timing of maturation and sex
change of sheephead across three decades.
source: (A) Sheephead images by Larry G. Allen. (B) From Hamilton et al. (2014).

SPEC IE S A ND CO MMUNI T Y EFFEC T S

These impacts on somewhat iconic species associated with kelp forests were a major
thread in the urge for protection of coastal species and habitats (e.g., Dayton et. al.
2000). How do they fare with the implementation of MPAs? The jury is still out on this,
but the mounting evidence is encouraging for the revival of many species. Micheli et
al. (2008) examined the persistence and possible recovery of red (Haliotis rufescens) and
black (H. cracherodii) abalone around Monterey in central California, an area inhabited
by otters. In the Hopkins Marine Life Refuge, they compared their surveys with those
of John Pearse and colleagues from 1972 to 1981 (Lowry and Pearse 1973, Cooper et al.
1977, Hines and Pearse, 1982) and repeated in 1990 and 1992 by graduate students
(unpublished theses). Neither the density nor the size structure of red abalone changed
significantly over 32 years, although they were quite variable between surveys. Similarly,
there were no difference in black abalone among years, but there was significant site-tosite variation. They concluded there was high mortality and that there was no return to
a level that could support a fishery because of the presence of sea otters. Rogers-Bennett
et al. (2002) provided mostly site-by-site descriptions and it was not possible to derive
anything definitive about the role of MPAs in abalone densities or sizes. Current evidence from other areas of the world provides some support for the benefits to abalone in
reserves where there are no voracious predators like sea otters. For example, a reserve at
Kaipiti Island in central New Zealand has seen dramatic increases in number and sizes
of the native abalone H. iris since 1992 when the reserve was established (C. Battershill,
pers. comm.).
Sea urchins should be a group that responds to MPA status, as the trophic effects
involving them were a major impetus in establishing MPAs. However, the mechanisms
affecting their abundances and sizes can work in different directions and over different
time scales. A release from fishing pressure (where it exists) should potentially lead to
an increase in both numbers and sizes, but indirect effects from potentially increasing
numbers and sizes of predatory fishes and lobsters could reduce urchin numbers and
sizes. Shears et al. (2012) used abundance and size data for two species of sea urchins
at the Channel Islands, off southern California, to assess this problem. They found that
the unfished purple urchin, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, had consistently low densities since 1982 within the reserve sites clustered at the end of Anacapa Island and that
there were variable but generally higher densities at the numerous non-reserve sites
across the oceanographic regions of the Channel Islands. The fished species, S. franciscanus, displayed similar patterns of abundances between the reserve and non-reserve
sites, but within the reserve the urchins were much bigger and therefore had much
greater reproductive output. They argued that the low densities of S. purpuratus at the
reserve sites were “consistent with the top-down density-mediated model,” whereas the
larger red urchins within the reserve sites were from cessation of fishing pressure. They
acknowledged, however, that the overall level of inference from their study was limited

MARINE PROTECTED AREAS AND FISHERIES EFFECTS

•

27 7

because of the limited number of reserve sites, which were near each other in one area
(see comments in previous chapter on lobster effects), and that their study demonstrated
the difficulties in generalizing about the effects of MPAs on sea urchin densities. This
is particularly so when there is a paucity of quality field- and lab-based experiments to
test key hypotheses, and a reliance mainly on correlative data across highly variable sites
and oceanographic regimes.
Lobsters appear to respond well to reserves, despite the potential for increased predation on them if predatory fishes increase in sizes and numbers. Kay et al. (2012) tested
hypotheses relating to abundance, trap yield, and spillover effects of the lobster Panulirus interruptus at and around three marine reserve sites with giant kelp at the Channel
Islands, off southern California, over 6 years. Visual underwater surveys showed that
there was a fourfold to sixfold increase in lobster abundances within reserves 6 years
after reserve status, relative to abundance before the reserve was established and at sites
outside reserves (figure 12.3). These results mirrored those from setting lobster traps
in the same areas; traps set within reserve sites had a fourfold to eightfold increase in
trap yields. No “spillover” effects were found, with numbers at adjacent sites and those
several kilometers away being far fewer than those within the reserve sites. As would be
expected, they also found that lobsters within reserve sites had morality rates similar to
estimates of natural mortality, whereas those outside reserves were higher and reflected
mortality due to fishing. Although Kay et al. (2012) found significant variation over time
among locations, there was clearly a positive effect of reserve status on lobster numbers.
The story is also complicated for multispecies assemblages. Guenther et al. (2012)
examined sea urchin and macroalgal abundance data with reference to fishery data
for landings of the lobster P. interruptus using 8 years of catch data from eight rocky
subtidal reefs with giant kelp forests near Santa Barbara, southern California. All sites
were subjected to fishing. They found that sea urchins were abundant at all sites but
there was no relationship between lobster fishing landings and sea urchin abundances
overall. They also found that macroalgal biomass varied independently of urchin density
across sites and years, and that there was no relationship between lobster fishing and
macroalgal biomass. They concluded there was “little evidence that intensity of lobster
fishing, as measured by fishing effort, induced a trophic cascade leading to low macroalgal biomass,” a similar conclusion to that of Foster and Schiel (2010).
Further afield in Australia, Edgar and Barrett (1999) examined the responses of a
suite of species to four no-take reserves, using associated reference sites for comparison
on the eastern and southeastern coasts of Tasmania. They used multiple sites within
reserves and reference areas, enabling location-by-location analyses. They found that at
the largest reserve (Maria Island), the number of fish species increased by 5% within
the reserve compared to –23% in the reference area. The number of mobile invertebrates
increased by 25% and algal richness by 11% compared to drops of 7–5% outside the
reserve. None of these taxon groups changed in the 5 years of reserve status at the two
smaller reserves. Some of the biggest changes at Maria Island were in rock lobsters,

27 8

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

0.009

A
a

Before
After

Lobster density (number/m²)

0.006

0.003
b

b

b

0.000
In
0.03

B

Out

a

0.02

0.01

b

b

0.00
In

Near

Far
Out

Location
figure 12.3
The results of visual underwater surveys (mean + SE) of the abundances of the California
spiny lobster P. interruptus within reserve (n = 3) and non-reserve sites at the Channel
Islands, southern California. (A) The numbers per m2 “Before” = 1997–2003 and “After” =
2007–2010 reserve status. This includes all lobsters observed. (B) Abundances “In” = inside
reserve sites, “Near” = adjacent to reserve sites, and “Far” = 2–6 km outside of reserve sites
in “after” period of 2008; these surveys included only legal-sized lobsters (>82.5 mm carapace length). Letters represent results of Tukey’s post hoc test (designation “a” significantly
greater than those with “b,” which are similar to each other).

from an average of 0.8 per 50 m transect in 1992 to 2.8 per transect in 1997, compared
to an increase from 1.3 to 1.5 per transect outside the reserve. The number of abalone
inside and outside reserves did not change, but there were more large ones within the
reserve. These studies were extended to 10 years, using a BACI design (before–after
control impact). Barrett et al. (2009) examined four reserves and their references sites,
analyzing them separately and collectively. They found increases in the destructive
urchin Centrostephanus rodgersii after 7 years outside of reserves, driven mostly by large
recruitment in two reference sites. Another sea urchin, Heliocidaris erythrogramma,
declined by around 30% after 7 years inside the reserves but not in the fished sites. The
abundances of the abalone H. rubra fluctuated greatly in both reserve and reference
sites over the years, and declined significantly at Maria Island. There was a decline in
both cryptic juveniles and intermediate-sized (sub-legal) abalone, which was not seen at
the reference site. At another site (Tinderbox), abalone increased at fished sites but not
in the reserve. Similarly, the abundances of lobsters, Jasus edwardsii, increased greatly
in the Maria Island reserve, almost entirely due to the increase in numbers of large
(“legal” sized) individuals. They estimated that total biomass of lobsters within the
reserve increased by an order of magnitude over the 10 years, but remained relatively
stable in the reference area. Similarly at Tinderbox, lobster numbers increased twofold
and biomass ninefold relative to the reference site. Other metrics, like invertebrate and
algal taxa richness, did not vary greatly between reserves and reference sites. Community analyses showed there was no obvious divergence between reserve and reference
sites. They concluded that one implication of their study is the complex nature of trophic
changes because in some habitats, abalone may not increase in MPAs when predators
are also protected and increasing in abundance. If the goal, therefore, is to conserve
abalone, then other protection measures may be needed.
Babcock et al. (2010) reviewed decadal trends of direct and indirect effects of MPAs
in several countries, including those with giant kelp forests. They found that direct
effects on target species take an average of around 5 years to be manifested and indirect
effects on other taxa on average of 13 years. In 78% of the cases examined, they found
that populations of exploited species increased in reserves. These included lobsters and
predatory fish, although almost all effects had quite large variation. In half of the cases
they examined, indirect effects occurred that involved increases in basal groups such as
macroalgae. They noted that not all effects were due to reserve status, as there was evidence of considerable variation in recruitment among key species, locations, and years.
As discussed briefly above for lobsters in California, the issue of spillover effects
from reserves into nearby areas is hard to tie down. It makes intuitive sense that if
populations of targeted species increase in reserves, then some of these might fi nd
their way outside of reserves and also that the increased reproductive output of the
larger individuals accumulating in reserves would contribute to areas outside. There
are some documented cases of spillover effects, but many effects, particularly involving
beneficial recruitment effects of key species within reserves spilling over to outside

280

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

areas, remain elusive so far. In one tropical example, Abesamis and Russ (2010) found
evidence for density-dependent export of a planktivorous fish after around 15 years in
a coastal marine reserve in the Philippines. The effect on numbers and sizes of fish
extended, however, to no more than 0.5 km from the reserve. They and others have
highlighted how technically and logistically difficult it is to demonstrate export from
reserves to nearby areas (e.g., Hilborn et al. 2004, Sale et al. 2005).

G A P S AND THE FU TUR E O F MPA S

In reading through the voluminous literature on MPAs, it is clear that their benefits are
substantial and yet many are unrealized, at least to this point. There is no doubt there
has been a fair degree of uncritical advocacy involved in the debate about MPAs, their
beneficial effects, and their utility as management tools (cf. Sale et al. 2005). There are
several thoughtful perspectives on gaps in our understanding and how future MPAs
might be developed. Steve Gaines and colleagues refer to this evolving science of marine
reserves with respect to new developments and emerging research frontiers (Gaines,
Lester, et al. 2010). In a review of progress to date, they note that the protocols for analyzing responses for multiple interacting reserves are not well developed. They advocate
that a framework is needed for implementing adaptive management so that optimal
networks can be developed that collectively maximize a range of objectives, including
conservation and viable fisheries outside the reserves. They view it as essential to have
an integration of marine reserve and fisheries science, an argument also made by Gell
and Roberts (2003). Reserves are most likely to be effective in their multiple objectives if
they are part of an ecosystems-based management approach that includes consideration
of areas outside reserves. Given the multiple users and uses of coastal resources, this
may require some form of bioeconomic and socioeconomic modeling. Sale et al. (2005)
identified gaps in the ecological science of no-take reserves. These include understanding the distance and direction that larvae disperse, knowing more about the movement
patterns of juvenile and adult fishery species, knowing more about indirect effects such
as those relating to fisheries extractions, a better knowledge of water masses along
coastlines, and better designed reserves that can rigorously test effects on nearby areas
where fisheries and other activities are allowed. Of course, this can read as a compendium of work across the marine science domain but, nevertheless, illustrates the great
unknowns in such highly variable systems.
We end this chapter noting that MPAs are powerful tools with enormous societal
resonance, but they are not a panacea to coastal problems. Schiel (2013) noted that even
in New Zealand, which has an advanced and largely sustainable commercial fisheries adaptively managed through a transferable quota system, and a long-standing and
advanced marine reserve system, at least 93% of coastal waters have no formal protection. With increasing anthropogenic stressors along the coastline, this implies either
that MPA networks will need to be expanded considerably or that other management

MARINE PROTECTED AREAS AND FISHERIES EFFECTS

•

2 81

tools will be required. One of the biggest threats to coastal ecosystems worldwide is the
terrestrial runoff and sediments, which are essentially land-use and catchment-based
issues. As pointed out relatively early in the MPA debate (e.g., Allison et al. 1998) and
highlighted in recent reviews (Mora and Sale 2011), no reserve is likely to be effective
if wide-ranging and diff use impacts are affecting whole coastlines. This may well have
happened in some heavily urbanized areas of California, the legacies of which are still
being felt (Foster and Schiel 2010). Furthermore, the problems are often too great and
expansive to be solved by MPAs without some other forms of management.

282

•

HUMAN USAGE, MANAGEMENT, AND CONSERVATION

PART IV

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

This page intentionally left blank

13
GLOBAL CHANGE
Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of
the observed changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia.
The atmosphere and ocean have warmed, the amounts of snow and
ice have diminished, sea level has risen, and the concentrations of
greenhouse gases have increased.
—IPCC (2013)

Whereas forecasts of changes in species’ geographic ranges typically predict
severe declines . . ., paleoecological studies suggest resilience to past climatic
warming . . . Superficially, it seems that either forecasts of future response
are overestimating impacts . . . or that history is somehow an unreliable
guide to the future.
—Moritz and Agudo (2013)

The preponderance of evidence is that the earth’s climate is changing at an unprecedented rate, and many predictions are dire about the consequent changes on ecosystems. In regard to the ocean, the major physical variables of change are likely to be
temperature, wave forces, sea level, and pH from increasing atmospheric CO2 (Brierley
and Kingsford 2009, IPCC 2013). Climate change must be viewed, however, within the
context of numerous other stressors from increasing human populations, urbanization, intensified land use, coastal runoff of sediments, nutrients, and contaminants,
species extractions, and the spread of nonindigenous species (e.g., Schiel 2009, Smale
et al. 2013; see Chapter 10). These in combination may have numerous nonlinear and
perhaps unpredictable effects on species distributions, community structure, disease
vectoring, food and interaction webs, and ecosystem functions and services (Mooney et
al. 2009, Harley et al. 2012, Smale et al. 2013). Here we use “global change” as a more
inclusive term to indicate climate change within the broader context of other stressors
and impacts.
It seems clear there are no “free lunches” with respect to the environment, and that
almost all activities have flow-on effects to other parts of the broader ecosystem. Given
this connectivity and interaction among ecosystem components, isolating the effects of

28 5

one of even a few variables acting on kelp forest dynamics is challenging. We know that
impacts have already occurred and that we are not proceeding from a baseline of pristine
conditions (cf. Dayton et al. 1998). Nevertheless, the impacts of extreme physical conditions, especially at the limits of kelp distributions, give clues about changes that might
occur in giant kelp forests over the coming decades. As long-term studies continue in
more places, we will get a sharper view of changes, their environmental correlates, and
causes. Furthermore, a wide range of laboratory-based studies is beginning to show
the sensitivities of many key species, for example to changes in water temperature and
pH levels, although it is currently far from clear how these might translate into natural
communities. The scenarios for species responses are usually designated as tolerate,
move, adapt, or die (e.g., Harley et al. 2012). If this book and similar analyses stand
the test of time, future readers will be able to see how accurately present-day scientists
predicted effects and changes, or if we were alarmist or wide of the mark in how extreme
the changes turned out to be. Certainly, there has been an exponential increase in the
literature on climate change over the past few years, and this seems likely to continue
as science further engages in trying to understand the mechanisms, processes, and
consequences of global change. Here we present an overview of climate changes and
discuss potential effects on giant kelp and associated organisms.

CLIMATE CHANGE VA R I AB LE S AND PR E D I C TE D TR END S

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has gone through periodic
updates of climate model refi nements and predictions. The bad news, with a high
degree of certainty, is that a wide range of climate-related variables are undergoing large
and rapid change. The IPCC reports that the averaged globally combined land and ocean
surface temperature has increased by 0.78°C during the period 2003–2012 compared
to 1850–1900 (figure 13.1). There has been substantial interannual and inter-decadal
variability due, for example, to strong ENSO and Pacific Decadal Oscillation periods.
The IPCC (2013) reports with “high confidence” that the ocean accounts for >90% of
the energy accumulated between 1971 and 2010, with the upper 75 m having warmed
by 0.11°C per decade, and with 60% of this energy stored in the upper ocean (0–700 m
depth). In conjunction with soot fallout and loss of ice albedo (Hansen and Nazarenko
2004), this has led to melting sea ice, thermal expansion, and increases in mean sea
level by around 0.19 m over the past century (figure 13.2). Carbon dioxide concentrations have risen by around 40% since pre-industrial times, and the ocean has absorbed
around 30% of this, which has caused increased acidification (IPCC 2013; figure 13.3).
The rise in CO2 concentration in the atmosphere is the greatest in several hundredthousand years (Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2007) and the adsorption of CO2 has led to a
decrease of around 0.2 pH units per decade over the past 30 years (Hoegh-Guldberg
and Bruno 2010). There is also accumulating evidence that changes to the earth’s wind
fields are leading to increased wave action in many parts of the world’s oceans (Young

286

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

Observed globally averaged combined land and ocean
surface temperature anomaly 1850–2012
0.6

Annual average

Temperature anomaly (°C) relative to 1961–1990

0.4
0.2
0.0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
0.6

Decadal average

0.4
0.2
0.0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
1850

1900

1950

2000

Year
figure 13.1
Observed data of global mean temperatures (combined land and ocean surface temperature
anomalies, relative to the mean from 1901 to 2012) from 1850 to 2012. Top panel: annual
means; bottom panel: decadal means, including error estimates (shown in shaded blocks).
Different shaded lines represent different data sets.
source: From figure SPM.1 in IPCC (2013).

et al. 2011), which potentially will have direct impacts on kelp forests. The most recent
climate models show all of these trends continuing through this century. The IPCC
climate models for future scenarios are based on Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) carried out under the World Climate Research Programme. Based on these
models, the most likely projections are for continued increases in surface temperature,
loss of sea ice, increases in sea level, and increasing acidification in the ocean surface.
Furthermore, IPCC (2013) concludes that most aspects of climate change are likely to
last for many centuries.

GLOBAL CHANGE

•

287

Arctic summer sea ice extent

A
14

(million km²)

12
10
8
6
4
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
B

Change in global average upper ocean heat content

(10²² J)

20
10
0

−10
−20
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Global average sea level change

C
200

(mm)

150
100
50
0

−50
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
figure 13.2
Other observed indicators of changes in the global climate (annual averages
of different data sets in darker lines and error estimates in shaded areas).
(A) Arctic summer sea ice extent; (B) global mean heat content of the upper
ocean (0–700 m) (aligned to 2006–2010, relative to mean for 1970); (C)
global mean sea level.
source: From figure SPM.3 in IPCC (2013).

Atmospheric CO2

A
400

CO2 (ppm)

380
360
340
320
300
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
Surface ocean CO2 and pH

B
400
380

340
320
8.12

8.09

8.06
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
figure 13.3
(A) Atmospheric CO2 levels since 1958 from Mauna Loa (gray line) and the South Pole (black line).
(B) Ocean surface CO2 (as partial pressure of CO2, top lines) and pH (a measure of sea water acidity,
bottom lines); lines indicate different data sets from the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
source: From figure SPM.4 in IPCC (2013).

in situ pH unit

pCO2 (µatm)

360

Taken together, these changes and their interactions provide a dramatically altered
environmental envelope in which ocean ecosystems are likely to operate. The potential
changes to kelp forest ecosystems are far less certain and largely surmised, due not only
to the, as yet, unpredicted and complex ways that climate variables may act on species
and their interactions, but also in how they may act in a more direct way on giant kelp
itself with its complex requirements and physiological–ecological responses across its
life stages (see Chapters 2–4). Helmuth et al. (2006) raised several questions that must
be addressed in forecasting the impact of climate change on the distribution and abundances of organisms. Among these are, how close are individuals living to the limits
of their physiological tolerances within their range? Essentially, are they at the limit of
their “fundamental niche”? Other questions involve knowing where distributions are
determined by biotic interactions that may be affected by climate indirectly, whereby
boundaries and limits determine the “realized niche” space, understanding whether
species can adapt and evolve, and how patterns of fertilization success and propagule
dispersal are affected. Because of the complexities involved in answering these questions, it is often the case that community changes do not necessarily correlate well with
any single factor. With reference to predictions of future responses, Harley et al. (2012)
termed these “gaps in the ecophysiological framework.”
These complexities are exemplified by a reconstruction of giant kelp distribution and
biomass in southern California since the last glacial maximum, around 20,000 years
ago. Graham et al. (2010) made the assumption, which they recognized as untestable,
that the responses of Macrocystis to environmental forcing have stayed relatively constant
over this long time period. Their model showed that the area cover of rocky reef and the
biomass of giant kelp peaked around 13,500 years ago, but then declined by 40–70% to
present levels. Peaks in kelp abundance were the result of increases in habitable forest
area and a transition to more productive ocean conditions. Production was surmised
from the known relationship between temperature and nutrients in that region. A transition to a sand-dominated system in some areas around 4000–6000 years ago was
associated with the demise in kelp distribution and abundance. This reconstruction is
based on known, present-day responses of kelp, but, of course, these constitute only one
of a suite of potential responses of giant kelp to environmental forcing. How instructive
this might be for the rapid environmental changes that are occurring now cannot be
determined at this stage.
The complexity of processes relating to global change encompasses most of the topics
of this book. These span broad spatial changes in ocean conditions to local-scale effects
within coastlines and kelp forests, temporal changes over decades to short-term effects
within seasons, and potentially cumulative effects that compound impacts (Pandolfi
et al. 2011, Harley et al. 2012, Maxwell et al. 2013). Here, however, we discuss potential
changes to giant kelp forests under the rubric of climate-related stressors, and refer
back to relevant chapters for more thorough treatment of the effects of these factors on
giant kelp.

29 0

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

TE MPE R AT U R E

Brierley and Kingsford (2009) argued that temperature has the most pervasive climaterelated influence on biological function. It seems clear that temperature is a major factor
in die-off events of major habitat formers such as corals (e.g., McClanahan et al. 2004,
Donner et al. 2005) and kelp (Wernberg et al. 2010), although there are potentially
numerous contributing factors such as increases in solar radiation and decreases in
nutrients (Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2007). An increase in extreme thermal events (e.g.,
Denny et al. 2009) contributes to the frequency of these die-offs. For kelps, diebacks
have tended to occur at the limits of biogeographic distributions where physical tolerances may be exceeded (e.g., Wernberg et al. 2010). For example, Helmuth et al. (2006)
reported that the poleward contraction of a cold-water kelp, Alaria esculenta, from its
southern limit in Britain has reflected a poleward shift in the summer SST isotherm of
16°C, which can be fatal to mature plants of this species (Widdowson 1970). The occasional change in the southern, warm-water limit of Macrocystis has been well described
along the west coast of North America. It recedes from its southern limit off Baja California, Mexico, during El Niño years, most likely because of a combination of high temperature, low nutrients, and extreme storm events (see Chapter 5, Edwards and Estes
2006). Similarly, canopy dieback during summer in southern California is correlated
with both higher seawater temperatures and nutrient depletion (Jackson 1977, 1987)
but may also be related to natural frond senescence (Rodriguez et al. 2013). Because
numerous factors act in concert in natural situations, there can be some lability of kelp
responses even during extreme events, whereby some local populations of giant kelp
survive (e.g., Foster and Schiel 1993, Ladah and Zertuche-González 2004). These refugia may act as source populations for recovery.
One of the longest studies involving giant kelp in which temperature was manipulated involved a small cove (18 m maximum depth, 2 km shoreline, 15 ha area) in central
California that was heated by an average of 3.5°C above ambient seawater temperatures
for 10 years (Schiel et al. 2004, Steinbeck et al. 2005). The heating was the result of a
once-through cooling unit (see Chapter 10) of the Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant,
which draws seawater from outside the cove, uses it in a cooling system to recondense
freshwater steam, and discharges it into the cove at a maximum rate of 9.5 × 109 L day−1,
creating a thermal plume that spreads throughout the cove with the warmest water near
the sea surface. As this cove was near the biogeographic boundary of Point Conception
between central and southern California, it was hypothesized that cold-water species
might decline and warm-water species might dominate, as predicted by other research
(Sagarin et al. 1999). Although 150 of the 172 subtidal species recorded changed significantly in abundance with elevated temperatures relative to controls, there was no
consistent pattern of change in abundance related to geographic affinities. Most species
were cosmopolitan, with broad geographic distributions, and most of these underwent
significant changes in abundance. Subtidal understory kelps, especially Pterygophora

GLOBAL CHANGE

•

291

californica and Laminaria setchelli, declined by 82%, from an average of 7 m−2 to 1 m−2
(figure 13.4). The cold-water bull kelp Nereocystis luetkeana, which had dominated the
surface canopy in the cove, was almost entirely replaced by Macrocystis. This study
showed that a rise of around 3.5°C in temperature can trigger wide-ranging changes in
communities, but also that changes involve complex biotic interactions. Although control areas underwent large changes over 20 years, they were remarkably similar to initial
conditions by the end of the study. The changes to thermally affected areas, however,
were great. Not only was there replacement of the large kelps, but the understory kelps
also had no major recruitment over the 10 years of temperature increase; sea urchins
increased for 3 years and then decreased as foliose understory (mostly red) algae came
into dominance. These fluctuating changes in understory algae and invertebrates in
the thermally elevated cove have continued since Schiel et al. (2004) completed their
study (J. Steinbeck, pers. comm.). It is interesting to note that although the once-dominant kelp Nereocystis recruited annually into the cove, the plants did not grow to reach
the canopy, presumably because of thermal stress in the water column. Although it is
unwarranted to ascribe a single cause to these persistent changes, it nevertheless is
instructive that the major factor that initiated change was the elevation in temperature
within the cove. Furthermore, because this was set up as a before–after control-impact
study, there was thorough sampling for 10 years in both the cove and outside control
areas before the heating treatment affected the cove, thereby providing robust statistical
analyses of changes, rather than just correlations between disparate time periods.
One other study is particularly instructive for discussion of temperature effects on
giant kelp communities. The studies of Craig Johnson and colleagues in Tasmania,
discussed in a previous chapter (see Chapter 8), presented clear mechanistic ways in
which environmental effects on a major herbivore contributed to the significant demise
of kelp forests. In this case, the onshore movement of a warm water current brought larvae of the sea urchin Centrostephanus rodgersii to the coast of Tasmania. Because urchin
larvae had suitable temperatures and development time in this current, they were able to
survive the transport from the Australia mainland and establish large populations along
coastal Tasmania (Johnson et al. 2011). Their arrival and then population expansion
coincided with both a long-term decline in giant kelp and a large increase in fishing of
their major predator, the lobster Jasus edwardsii, especially of the large individuals that
are capable of eating mature urchins (Ling et al. 2009). It is unlikely anyone could have
predicted these types of extensive changes to giant kelp communities because they were
the result of complex interactions between kelp dynamics, the behavior of a current,
larval life history, and transport of a key grazer that had not previously been important
in Tasmanian waters, buildup of urchin populations over time resulting in intense grazing effects, and size-selective overfishing of a key predator. As in the example of the
warming of a cove above, temperature played a key role in triggering ecological changes,
but the resultant cascades through the kelp communities were dictated by a wide range
of other factors.

29 2

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

Subtidal control sites

A

250

140

225

Foliose algae

120

Percent cover

100

175
150

80

125
60

100
75

40
Grazers

50

20

Abundance (no. m–2)

200

25

Subcanopy kelps

0

0

B

Subtidal impact sites
250

140
Foliose algae

225

120

Percent cover

100

175
150

80

125
60

100

Grazers

75

40

50
20

Abundance (no. m–2)

200

25

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

0
1986

1984

1982

1978

0

1980

Subcanopy kelps

figure 13.4
Changes in cover of kelps, foliose algae, and invertebrate grazers at Diablo Cove (central California) at sites under the influence of heating from the discharge of heated water of a coastal
power plant, and of nearby control sites under ambient conditions. Annual mean percent
cover of foliose algae (left axes) and numbers of subcanopy kelps and grazers (right axes)
at (A) subtidal control sites and (B) subtidal impact sites. Note that percent cover can total
>100% because of layering of algae; the sample area was 7 m2. Arrow indicates start of thermal increase of seawater temperature by an average of 3.5°C, which lasted from 1985 onward.
source: From Schiel et al. (2004).

It is clear that even with the potentially quick recovery of kelp after disturbances,
short-term changes can have long-term consequences. As has been argued for intertidal assemblages (Schiel 2011), these may be due to sporadic recruitment, changes to
benthic substrata such as occupation by corallines and foliose algae, alteration of canopy
structure and therefore of the light environment to benthic areas but also, as seen in
subtidal kelp assemblages, the continued presence of stressors such as sediments (Connell 2005). Collectively, these impacts may alter the resilience of kelp communities and
their competitive and facilitative interactions, as well as make them more vulnerable to
a changing climate (Wernberg et al. 2010).
There is also evidence that some kelp-dominated areas are becoming “tropicalized.”
Verges et al. (2014) showed that regions with continuous tropical-to-temperate coastlines
influenced by Western Boundary Currents, such as Japan, the eastern United States, eastern Australia, and southeastern South Africa, are vulnerable to kelp declines and replacement by barren communities or even corals. They concluded that these phase shifts
are largely due to warm-water intrusion and range-shifting tropical herbivorous fishes
that severely graze temperate macrophytes, including kelps. These types of effects have
not yet been seen in giant kelp forests, but this study offers instructive scenarios on
how temperature-mediated complex interactions can drastically alter warm-temperate
communities.

NU TR IENT S AND WAVE FO R CE S

A fundamental relationship in the coastal zone around giant kelp forests is the negative correlation between seawater temperature and nutrients (see Chapter 3). This is
particularly well described along southern California where seasonal upwelling brings
a rapid drop in seawater temperature and a corresponding increase in upwelled nitrogen (Jackson 1977, McPhee-Shaw et al. 2007, Lucas et al. 2011). The combination of
these two factors can have a great effect on giant kelp, and it is the frequency and magnitude of high SST and low nutrients with climate change that are likely to produce the
greatest effects, particularly if SSTs get beyond around 26°C (Hernández-Carmona et
al. 2001).
As has been shown in strong El Niño periods, Macrocystis is vulnerable to extended
periods of low nutrients because of its limited nutrient storage capacity of around
2 weeks (Gerard 1982b). As described in Chapter 3, water column stratification can lead
to warm, nutrient-depleted surface water (Lucas et al. 2011) and deterioration of plants
(Gerard 1982a). The reversal of these conditions during upwelling episodes with low
SST and great pulses of nitrogen sweeping through kelp forests is a principal driver
of giant kelp forest growth and the persistence of giant kelp at the equatorward limits
of its range in Mexico (Hernández-Carmona et al. 2001) and Chile (review in Vásquez
et al. 2006). Any alteration of the periodicity, intensity, or chemical characteristics
of upwelling may therefore interact with larger-scale increases in temperature and

29 4

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

decreases in nutrients to further truncate the biogeographic limits of Macrocystis under
future climate change scenarios, especially as they impinge on the physiological tolerances of giant kelp.
Extensions of the biogeographic distribution of Macrocystis in the opposite direction toward the poles could conceivably occur in the northern hemisphere. This would
depend not only on the extent of warmer SSTs but also to a considerable extent on
the ability of giant kelp to compete with a diverse range of resident northern kelps in
the lower light and truncated seasons of the north (Chapter 3). The southern hemisphere poleward distribution of Macrocystis is unlikely to change in future scenarios.
The current southern distribution is set by the absence of shallow rocky reefs south
of the subantarctic islands (see Chapter 5), and considerable warming of the Antarctic continent as well as considerable dispersal would need to occur for giant kelp to
occupy it.
Exposure to waves has large effects on the local-scale distribution and dynamics of
Macrocystis (see Chapter 3). In very exposed situations, such as the subantarctic islands
and many outer coast sites, Macrocystis is limited to the lee side or protected inlets. Reed
et al. (2011) showed that winter storms remove most of the canopy of giant kelp annually
in central California, essentially overwhelming many other processes affecting primary
production in forests. El Niño storms may provide the best mimics of a changing wave
climate, whereby increasing temperatures, decreasing nutrients, and increased storm
waves combine to remove large tracts of giant kelp forests, with recovery taking up to
several years (Edwards 2004). The wind fields and wave climate are changing across
the globe. Young et al. (2011) showed that there has been a significant increase in wave
height, particularly of the largest waves (95th and 99th percentiles), since 1985. If this
trend persists, then exposed outer coasts will continue to be challenging environments
for developing kelp forests, regardless of what other changes occur in temperature
increases and nutrient provision.

O CE AN ACID IFI C ATI O N (OA )

Acidification of the world’s oceans from increasing amounts of atmospheric CO2 is
one of the more insidious problems of climate change. The past decade or so has seen
a growing literature on the effects of OA on marine organisms and an increasing
awareness of potential effects on species and ecosystems (reviews in The Royal Society
2005, Doney et al. 2009, Hurd et al. 2009, Hofmann et al. 2010, Harley et al. 2012,
Dupont and Pörtner 2013). Doney et al. (2009) pointed out that OA is not prone to
the uncertainties of climate change forecasts but is a predictable consequence of rising atmospheric CO2. They state that “absorption of anthropogenic CO2, reduced pH,
and lower calcium carbonate (CaCO3) saturation in surface waters, where the bulk of
oceanic production occurs, are well verified from models, hydrographic surveys, and
time series data.”

GLOBAL CHANGE

•

29 5

The processes affected by acidification include calcification of plankton, macroalgae
and invertebrates, carbon and nutrient assimilation, primary production, and acid–base
balance in the oceans (Blackford 2010). Much of the literature relating to algal beds is
derived from laboratory-based studies or those around thermal vents involving natural gradients in pH levels. There are myriad problems, however, in translating these
types of studies into the far more complex processes in natural ecosystems. Calcification responses in nature are complicated, for example, by interactions with changing
temperatures or nutrients. Doney et al. (2009) also identify that most studies relating to
acidification have been short term, usually no more than a few weeks, and that chronic
exposure to increased CO2 could have complex effects on growth and reproduction.
Other problems are technological and methodological in working out the best ways to
build lab systems that can realistically alter pH levels without introducing artifacts in
seawater conditions. Hurd et al. (2009) pointed out that elucidating acidification effects
on algae is not simple because when pH is altered, so too is the carbon speciation in
seawater, which can affect photosynthesis and calcification rates. Other problems arise
because pH levels in seawater are not constant but change in response to photosynthesis
and respiration, which release CO2 and lowers pH (Hurd et al. 2009). Hofmann et al.
(2010) argued that the core issues involve understanding the extent to which organisms
can tolerate future acidification and the acclimatization capacity of populations, neither
one of which is well known. Because of the extensive potential effects of acidification on
calcifying organisms throughout marine ecosystems, and the roles of these organisms
in primary production, benthic cover, competitive effects, water chemistry, and food
web dynamics, the topic of OA is vast. We confine ourselves here largely to consideration
of potential effects in giant kelp forests.

EFFEC T S O F OA O N A LG A E

Studies on giant kelp have so far shown there will be few, if any, direct negative effects
of acidification. Roleda, Morris, et al. (2012) found in a lab experiment that a lowered
seawater pH of 7.60 (but achieved with the addition of HCl) led to a 6–9% reduction
in meiospore germination, but increased dissolved inorganic carbon had the opposite
effect. They emphasized the need for appropriate manipulation of seawater carbonate
chemistry when testing OA on photosynthetic organisms. They also found that gametophytes were slightly larger under conditions of lowered pH. They concluded that metabolically active cells may compensate for seawater acidification. Also in southern New
Zealand, Hepburn et al. (2011) used isotopic analysis of δ13C across varying pH levels at
three depth strata to 12 m to separate noncalcifying macroalgae into functional groups.
They combined these field studies with “pH drift experiments” in the lab, whereby
changes in pH are measured during incubations. They found that all canopy-forming
algae, including Macrocystis, appeared to have active uptake of inorganic carbon, but
this was affected by low light. Noncalcifying red algae relied on diff usive uptake of

29 6

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

CO2 and were more common in low-light habitats. They concluded that increased CO2
would negatively affect only coralline species. Similarly, Harley et al. (2012) pointed out
that some red and most brown and green algae use bicarbonate (HCO3−) by converting
it intracellularly with CO2 concentrating mechanisms. They concluded that even with
variation in carbon use strategies across all taxa, noncalcifying seaweeds will probably
have a positive response to increased CO2. The responses of understory corallines are
not straightforward. For example, Kamenos et al. (2013) found that Lithothamnion glaciale increased its calcification rate at low pH (7.7) during the daytime, apparently compensating for OA-induced dissolution at night, but this was not supported by a change
in photosynthesis. When pH was changed rapidly, there were changes in the calcite
skeleton making the fronds structurally weak, which may compromise their competitive abilities and the communities they support.
At this stage, there are reasonably consistent conclusions about how macroalgae are
likely to respond to increasing levels of CO2. Calcifying organisms generally exhibit
larger negative effects than noncalcifying organisms, although with some exceptions
(Kroeker et al. 2010). As in other summaries, this could change the competitive dynamics of benthic calcifying and noncalcifying seaweeds (Kroeker et al. 2013). The result
of this type of modification to assemblage structure (although not involving giant kelp)
was shown along a series of volcanic vents, which acidified the seawater to a pH gradient
ranging from 8.20 to 6.07. Porzio et al. (2011) found that the vast majority of 100 macroalgal species occurred at almost all the sites along this gradient but their abundances
varied; calcifying turf species had disproportionate decreases in coverage down to pH
7.8. At the extreme pH level of 6.7, however, where carbonate saturation levels were <1,
calcareous species were absent and there was a 72% decline in species richness compared to the less acidified sites. Because these were resident communities, and volcanic
bents can persist for millennia, Porzio et al. highlighted the worth of further studies on
tolerant species, which may have undergone genetic changes and adaptations to a high
CO2 environment.

E FFE C T S O F CLIMATE CHANGE ON NON - ALG A L S P E CIE S

A review of the climate change literature highlights both the potential for massive
changes in algal-dominated systems through direct effects on organisms and the importance of interactive effects across the wide spectrum of physical, biological, chemical,
and ecological changes. There are numerous examples of changes in the distributions
of marine fishes in response to increases in seawater temperature (e.g., Perry et al.
2005, Hsieh et al. 2009, Verges et al. 2014). Temperature effects were examined, for
example, in southern California by Holbrook et al. (1997), who assessed changes in
fish assemblages at two sites between a cold-water period from 1960 to 1975 and
a warm-water period from 1975 to 1995 when average SST increased by 1.0–1.5°C.
They found that fish species richness declined by 15–25% and abundances by >90%

GLOBAL CHANGE

•

297

between these two periods. They attributed most of this decline to poor recruitment,
which coincided with a decrease in macro-zooplankton biomass in the California Current. Other studies have shown that recruitment success of species at higher trophic
levels can depend greatly on synchronization of larvae and pulses of planktonic production. The so-called match–mismatch of marine pelagic communities can be affected
by climate warming where responses differ over the seasonal cycle, with a consequent
mismatch between trophic levels and different functional groups (Edwards and Richardson 2004).
Of more direct influence on kelp forests are the potential effects of climate change on
sea urchins. Dupont et al. (2013) showed that acclimation time affected the responses of
the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis to increased seawater CO2. This urchin
species had impaired egg production and increased larval mortality when exposed to
high partial pressures of CO2 (1200 μatm) compared to 400 μatm pCO2 . However,
these effects disappeared when urchins had acclimated over 16 months. In a review
that included corals, polychaetes, molluscs, and echinoderms, Byrne (2011) found that
warming of 4–6°C did not impair fertilization success. Similarly, the great majority of
the species she reviewed showed that fertilization was robust to pH levels of 7.4–7.6
(pCO2 ≥ 1000 ppm). Although there is concern about the effects of OA on the development of calcifying larval stages because of reduced aragonite and calcite saturation in
seawater, there is only limited knowledge about these effects. Some echinoderms can
increase their metabolic rates and ability to calcify in response to increasing seawater
acidity. However, this may come at the cost of muscle wastage (Wood et al. 2008).
Abalone larvae may be quite sensitive to climate change, with embryo development
being impaired in conditions of increasing temperature and decreasing pH (Byrne
2011). For many taxa, there is also evidence for phenological shifts induced by ocean
warming that create mismatches between larval production and their food (Schofield
et al. 2010).
Global sea level rise over the next 100 years is likely to be around 0.5 m due primarily to the melting of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets and thermal expansion,
although this is considerably across the globe (IPCC 2013). This would undoubtedly
have great impacts on the coastal environment, but, other than potentially providing
more hard substrata for giant kelp, it seems unlikely it will have much of an effect on its
distribution. However, as in the distant past (Graham et al. 2010), associated changes in
habitats, such as sand inundation, could affect patch structure and abundances.

The overwhelming conclusion of studies on climate change is that “the impact of
humans on the biotic systems of the earth is dramatic and is accelerating” (Mooney et
al. 2009), that responses of species are quite variable, and that the “proximate causes of
species decline relative to resilience remain largely obscure” (Moritz and Agudo 2013).

29 8

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

It seems likely that in many places, we will be dealing with new mixtures of species,
as alien species continue to establish and spread across the globe, perhaps acclimatizing better than native species (Occhipinti-Ambrogi 2007), species shift in response to
changing conditions, and ecological relationships and dynamics change as new assemblages are formed. Many processes are, of themselves, quite complex. For example,
Roleda, Boyd, et al. (2012) offer a reminder that before OA is discussed there must
be “calcifier chemistry lessons.” They highlight that many published OA studies have
overlooked the fundamental issue that most calcifying organisms do not rely on carbonate from seawater to calcify, but can use bicarbonate (HCO3−) or metabolically produced
CO2. Mollusc shell carbonate comes from three sources, and calcifying seaweeds also
vary in their substrate for calcification. It seems we are still some way from understanding both fundamental processes across taxa and how these might combine to act across
communities.
Given the projections in changes to SST over the 21st century, it may well be the
case that the distribution of Macrocystis contracts along its present equatorward limits
(figure 13.5). SST changes are projected to be in the range of 1–2°C, even with the conservative RCP4.5 models, and above the global average in much of the area occupied by
giant kelp (IPCC 2013). Given that giant kelp has limited nutrient storage capacity, and
tends to decline at temperatures greater than around 23°C where nutrients are usually
below 1 μmol L −1 (Zimmerman and Robertson 1985), there may be considerable shrinking of its range away from the equator. This has been seen, for example, during El Niño
years in the Mexico and southern California range of Macrocystis, which has contracted
up to several hundred kilometers during these periods (e.g., Edwards and Estes 2006).
Even if upwelling remains the same in the future or perhaps increases (Sydeman
et al. 2014), the higher temperatures between events may prevent recovery of temperature- and nutrient-stressed populations. Other areas of potential contraction are in the
Peru–northern Chile region, the northern range of giant kelp along Argentina, the
warm-water area along South Africa, and along the coast of Tasmania where warmwater events are increasing. Any expansion of the range of giant kelp toward the poles
is likely to be light limited, because of shorter seasons and the low angle of incidence.
Jackson’s (1987) modeling (see Chapter 3) seems fairly convincing that long periods of
low or no light in far northern latitudes probably limits giant kelp to where it is now, with
competition from other species only making things more difficult for Macrocystis to
expand its range in that direction.
More localized, but potentially global, threats to giant kelp forests are likely to be
cumulative impacts across multiple changes and stressors, which can occur even where
there is some form of management protection (Maxwell et al. 2013). Our best guess
is that Macrocystis will continue to survive and thrive along most of its present midlatitude distribution in the face of these threats because of its broad physiological tolerances, fast growth, and massive reproductive output. On the other hand, the ecological

GLOBAL CHANGE

•

29 9

Nitrate vs. Temperature

Light vs. Latitude

600

0°
30°N
60°N
90°N

24
22

500

Insolation
(Wm-2) 300

14
12
10

LIMITING
TOWARDS
EQUATOR

8
6
4
2

200

September Equinox

400

16

June Solstice

18

March Equinox

[NO3]µg·at·l-1

20

December Solstice

26

M A M

J J A S O N D
Month

100

0

J F
11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

TEMPERATURE (°C)

19

20

21

Temperature vs. Potential Future Giant Kelp Loss

figure 13.5
Potential contraction of giant kelp distribution based on its temperature, nutrient, and light requirements.
Giant kelp does not thrive at temperatures beyond ca. 23°C (upper left), where in most areas toward the equator nutrients (especially nitrate) are well below 1 μg atm L −1 (see also figure 3.2). In the poleward direction,
light becomes limiting because of its seasonal duration and angle of incidence (upper right). Distributional
changes in giant kelp are most likely to occur near its current warm-water limits. Lower panel depicts projected changes in sea surface temperature for 2016–2035 relative to 1986–2005 under IPCC RCP4.5 models;
darker shading is an increase of 0.75–1°C, middle shading is 0.25–0.5°C, lightest shading is 0–0.25°C. The
likely areas of giant kelp loss are indicated by boxes with xx.
sources: Upper left from Zimmerman and Kremer 1984; upper right from Pidwirny (2006); lower panel from
fi gure 11.20 in IPCC (2013), Kirtman et al. (2013).

surprises and lessons from Tasmania are that overfishing, combined with changes in
currents, warming seawater, and the population explosion of a formerly rare sea urchin,
can have devastating consequences. Time will tell whether lessons are learned, stressors
under our control can be reduced, new and more effective types of management can
be enacted, and the degree to which these will make a difference in the face of global
climate change.

GLOBAL CHANGE

•

3 01

This page intentionally left blank

14
GIANT KELP FORESTS:
CONCLUSIONS AND FINAL
THOUGHTS
If nothing else, asking what species do in ecosystems and trying to cast replies
in a structured way, forces increased integration of ecosystem and population
biology, I believe to the benefit of the subject as a whole.
—Lawton (1994)

We want to emphasize that our usage applies not to those models but only to
the real world . . ..Rather than the physicists’ classical nature of stability, the
concept of persistence within stochastically defined bounds is, in our opinion,
more applicable to real ecological systems.
—Connell and Sousa (1983)

Giant kelp forests have achieved an iconic status among the world’s marine ecosystems
and within the scientific literature. With ever-increasing numbers of nature tourists,
scuba divers, recreational fishers, and wide-reaching nature documentaries, both the
natural beauty of giant kelp forests and the key role they play in the provision of “services” are much better appreciated globally. Within the scientific literature, giant kelp
forests have been a focal point for discussions about regime shifts and alternate states
of coastal ecosystems, and they have fed into a growing nexus of ecological theory and
management models related to spatial planning (e.g., Foley et al. 2010). In many ways,
they have achieved the status of “rain forests” of temperate seas in being the most widely
recognized inhabitant of temperate reefs and known for the high diversity they support.
We are therefore happy to report that giant kelp forests are largely thriving and have
remained so despite the numerous stressors on coastal ecosystems throughout the past
few centuries. To paraphrase the American humorist Mark Twain (1897), reports of their
demise are greatly exaggerated. This is both a cause for optimism, because giant kelp
populations worldwide themselves seem to be mostly intact, and for caution in that there
are clearly losses or severe reductions in many species associated with kelp forests as well
as many impacts and sources of degradation that may well increase in the future to the

30 3

detriment of giant kelp forests and the species and functions they support. To say that
Macrocystis forests are thriving is somewhat at odds with widely cited views that they are
in a highly compromised state because of the loss of key predators and increases in intensive grazing that have shifted kelp forests into an alternate state of degraded structure and
collapsed functioning (Jackson et al. 2001, Steneck et al. 2002). Based on our reading of
the worldwide literature, however, our summary of the state of giant kelp forests is not
a naive Panglossian view (Voltaire 1759) involving “the best of all possible worlds,” but a
recognition that, so far as we can determine, giant kelp still occupies the great majority
of its postglacial period distribution. There are modern exceptions, of course, such as
portions of the southern California mainland, where urban expansion coincided with
greatly increased sewage discharge, sedimentation, and altered dynamics involving sea
urchins and reduced numbers of predators (e.g., Foster and Schiel 2010). Instead of the
narrative from one or a few sites that formerly dominated the literature, however, we now
possess detailed knowledge about many giant kelp forests across both hemispheres. What
is revealed is a rich panoply of forest types, regional species pools, and a wide range of
ecological interactions and functional relationships across the globe. Even though dominant trophic groups include predacious fishes, lobsters, and sea urchins in most kelp
forests worldwide, there is no set of simple structures or ecological interactions that universally apply to kelp forests, and no set of simple environmental conditions that span the
diversity of kelp forest communities across hemispheres. It is the combination of biotic
and abiotic conditions within and across sites and regions and their effects on giant kelp
communities that have provided a more comprehensive knowledge of functioning and a
greater understanding of what Macrocystis does in the wider ecosystems it occupies. With
respect to the opening quote of this chapter, understanding the population biology of
Macrocystis and its relationship to the abiotic environment has provided the springboard
for our wider and more comprehensive appreciation of giant kelp forests. We also look to
the future, as we begin to experience changing global and regional climates, recognizing
that the present state is far from static and that there is a critical interplay between the life
history and ecology of giant kelp and the wider environment in which it lives.
Our conclusions are based on an extensive scientific literature, which has burgeoned
since our last treatise on Macrocystis (figure 14.1). Foster and Schiel (1985) cited 289
references that contained most of what was known about giant kelp forests at the time.
The emphasis was on the kelp forests along the west coast of North America where most
studies had been done. This present book, however, cites over 1000 references and contains a considerable expansion of knowledge on several fronts. Perhaps most notable of
these is the worldwide increase in kelp forest studies and the cross-disciplinary nature
of many studies that have achieved a great advancement in understanding the interplay
between the complete life history of giant kelp, especially the early life history stages,
and the environment. This has involved clever experimentation, detailed monitoring of
structure and temporal changes, and a far greater knowledge of ocean processes and
population dynamics of Macrocystis, dispersal of spores, settlement, delayed develop-

3 04

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

Cumulative number of references

Cumulative number of references

1000

Schiel and Foster (2015)

750

500

Foster and Schiel (1985)

250

2011

2007

2003

1999

1995

1991

1987

1983

1979

1975

1971

1967

1963

1959

1954

1947

1934

1923

1915

1908

1883

1651

0

figure 14.1
Cumulative number of references cited in Foster and Schiel (1985) and this book.

ment and metapopulation processes, the spatial scaling of effects from boundary layer
conditions to basin-wide climate impacts on giant kelp forests, and temporal scaling
from wave periods to decadal oscillations.
Taken together, these have highlighted that about the only thing common among
the giant kelp forests of the world is giant kelp itself. This has taken on new scope since
the reunification of giant kelp into the single species Macrocystis pyrifera (Demes et al.
2009) which has resulted in a considerable expansion of the biogeographic range of the
species (refer to figure 1.5) and changed our views of what constitutes a “giant kelp forest.” Here we present an overview of what we have gleaned in our journey through the
kelp forest literature with respect to the biology, community ecology, and management
of giant kelp forests. We end with speculation about the future of kelp forest studies.
In particular, we consider sustainability and the wider value of giant kelp forests in the
context of “natural capital,” which includes not just the “goods and services” to mankind
but also intrinsic values and perhaps deep ethical considerations of ensuring the future
of giant kelp forests for their own sake rather than ours.

B I O LO G Y O F GIANT KE LP

A much greater understanding of the full life history of giant kelp has provided significant new insights into why it is so successful and so widely distributed. Concerns about

GIANT KELP FORESTS: CONCLUSIONS AND FINAL THOUGHTS

•

305

degradation and altered functioning have largely focused on extractions of trophically
important species and ecological processes that remove giant kelp, especially the large
sporophytes (see Chapter 9). Population dynamics rely, however, on inputs and the processes that allow giant kelp to establish, maintain, and replenish populations. Given the
obvious fact that Macrocystis is the sine qua non of giant kelp forest communities, the
increased emphasis on the inter-relationships between its biology, life history characteristics, and the environment has yielded significant advancements in understanding
processes that were elusive when there was a primary focus on how other members
of the community, particularly grazers, predators and to a lesser extent competitors
affected giant kelp.
There are several other kelp species that extend through the water column and form
underwater forests with sea-surface canopies, but none of them has individuals that
attain the multiple fronds, large biomass, or areal cover achieved by Macrocystis. At densities as low as one plant per 10–15 m2 of reef, giant kelp can form closed canopies over
extensive areas of reef, compared to around one plant per square meter for Nereocystis,
Ecklonia maxima, or Eualaria (=Alaria) fistulosa (see Chapter 5). This potential for giant
size alone means that recruitment at what would be considered marginal densities for
other kelps can sustain a giant kelp forest. As discussed in Chapter 4, the capacity for
rapid growth to the sea surface allows plants to take advantage of a high-light environment unavailable to benthic species without surface canopies. The ability of giant
kelp to translocate materials to parts of the plant below in a low-light environment,
especially the reproductive sporophylls at the base of plants, allows high productivity,
high biomass, and repeated reproduction. Macrocystis is tolerant of a wide range of
temperatures from just above freezing to around 23°C, although this upper range is
often compromised by the low nutrients usually associated with higher temperatures.
In its population inputs, Macrocystis has a competitive advantage over most other
macroalgae. Its microscopic stages can develop in very low light and, once above the
substratum, larger sporophytes rapidly grow above turfing and foliose benthic species.
It can mature in less than a year and its continual spore production, made possible
because of it very high ratio of vegetative tissue to sporophyll biomass, probably saturates
the forest floor with spores. Multiyear “seed banks” may not occur for Macrocystis, and it
appears that the vast majority of recruitment results from newly settled spores (Reed et
al. 1997), even though there can be persistence of microscopic stages on the substratum
at least across multiple seasons (e.g., Carney et al. 2013).
In many ways, studies of giant kelp confirm its status as a mega-weed. Its prodigious
reproductive output of up to trillions of spores per plant allows a quick response to disturbances that create light gaps and ensures that the local environment of kelp forests
has the capacity for replenishment so long as adults are present nearby. Localized dispersal of spores within and around kelp forests is aided by tidal and local currents and
turbulent mixing (Graham 2003, Gaylord et al. 2006a, 2006b). However, spores can
disperse and settle in densities sufficient for fertilization and development up to several

306

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

kilometers (Reed et al. 2004), and long-distance dispersal can occur through detached
reproductive adults, which can form extensive floating rafts that persist and travel for
many months (see Chapter 6).
The presence and persistence of Macrocystis are influenced by several constraints.
The great biomass of adults in the water column makes plants highly susceptible to
removal by waves, which results in the great seasonality seen in production dynamics
along coastlines with severe winter storms, such as central California. Water motion
generally confines Macrocystis populations to sites without continual extreme waves
except in some places with exceptionally clear water where there are deep-water refugia.
Macrocystis also has little storage capacity for nutrients, on the order of 2 weeks, and
requires a continuous supply for populations to persist. This limited storage capacity
can affect plants during periods of high temperature and low nutrients, such as in El
Niño years in southern California and Mexico, when plants deteriorate (see Chapter
5). Conversely, the inability of Macrocystis to penetrate higher latitude reefs may be
a function of low light, prolonged periods of darkness, and perhaps continuous cold
temperatures and competition with other kelps.
On local scales, Macrocystis, like all kelps, is vulnerable to extensive grazing by sea
urchins, even though the bulk of the plant in the water column is well separated from
benthic grazers. Urchin-dominated areas can persist for many years before urchin mortality from storms or disease, poor urchin recruitment, predation, and / or successful
episodes of kelp recruitment re-establish kelp dominance. Because of its unique combination of characteristics and disturbance-oriented life history, Macrocystis rarely fails to
re-establish within a few years, even in sites severely impacted by disturbances, except
on isolated patch reefs (Reed et al. 2006—“A metapopulation perspective”). Therefore,
in answer to Lawton’s (1994) question of “what do species do?,” this one does a great
deal in terms of establishment, growth, persistence, dominance, and habitat provision.
Furthermore, it completes its life history with no need of facilitation by other species,
and only the basic requirements of hard reef, light, and nutrients. As a biogenic habitatformer, it has no equal in temperate waters.

CO MM UNITIE S

Delineating giant kelp communities is more a regional than a global exercise. The
taxonomic revision to the single species Macrocystis pyrifera brought a much greater
biogeographic cover of the species that included M. integrifolia along extensive regions
of North America, and this species plus M. angustifolia and M. laevis in the southern
hemisphere. The diversity of communities associated with these widely separated giant
kelp forests is illustrated in Chapter 5. An experienced diver, for example, would note
the poverty of understory kelps and water column fishes in southern hemisphere forests compared to those along California, where there is a lush and diverse group of
stipitate kelps and a great abundance of rock fishes in the water column. Given that

GIANT KELP FORESTS: CONCLUSIONS AND FINAL THOUGHTS

•

3 07

our notion of what constitutes a giant kelp “community” is now so expansive, it has
also become necessary to extend our concepts of critical functions, food web dynamics,
and structuring processes. Our conceptual frameworks may relate to a great extent on
both hemispheric and continental differences. The possibility of coevolution shaping
giant kelp communities and functions is far greater in the northern hemisphere where
Macrocystis most likely evolved, but it is unlikely in the southern hemisphere where it
appears to have spread relatively recently into existing communities (see Chapter 1 and
figure 4.10). In this sense, therefore, Macrocystis has acted more as a highly successful invasive or immigrant species in the southern hemisphere and has gone through
a process of acclimation in the communities it has invaded. Nevertheless, there are
strong interactions involving Macrocystis in all communities, but these are most likely
region- or area-specific.
From what we now know, it is enlightening to realize not only the vast differences in
the composition of species associated with giant kelp but also the great differences in
how trophically important groups such as sea urchins can have greatly different influences among regions. Several prominent studies argue for models of tight trophic control and cascading processes in the Northeast Pacific region (Estes et al. 1998, Jackson et
al. 2001, Steneck et al. 2002) but, in contrast, there is little evidence for anything other
than localized patch effects of sea urchins in giant kelp forests in Chile, New Zealand,
and many other southern hemisphere regions (with the exception of Tasmania; below
and Chapter 8). The strong trophic linkages in the north relate mostly to the voracious
predator of sea urchins, the sea otter Enhydra lutris, which had been removed by hunting
from much of the west coast of North America in historical times. The destabilization of
evolved processes through hunting may well have had significant effects over millennia
along the coast and offshore islands of California involving other herbivores such as
abalone (Erlandson et al. 2005). Questions remain, however, about the extent, strength,
and temporal occurrence of such trophic interactions and the degree to which they
exerted a controlling influence on giant kelp worldwide.
There is somewhat of a dichotomy of perspectives in the ecological literature, broadly
involving alternate stable states on the one hand or, as Connell and Sousa (1983) wrote,
“persistence of communities within stochastically defi ned bounds.” Several authors
have reviewed this theme, pointing out the confusion of terminology involving stable
states, regime shifts, and phase shifts, and the exceptions and limited site narratives
used in many examples (Bruno et al. 2009, Dudgeon et al. 2010). There are a lot of
theories involved that are attractive to many ecologists and which feed into system
models. With respect to giant kelp forests and their structure, however, much of this
seems un-natural, mainly because Macrocystis still occupies the great majority of its
historical range. The dichotomy of perspectives is illustrated by two recent studies, one
in Canada and one in Australia. Watson and Estes (2011) examined sites among parts
of Vancouver Island that encompassed the re-habitation of sea otters over a period of
23 years. Through detailed surveys and following the development of plots over 20 sites,

308

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

they found that sea urchins dominated many sites and large algae were sparse where
otters were not present. Urchin density declined over a period of several years after
otters returned and algae became more abundant. They called this a “phase shift,” with
the phase states being either algal- or urchin-dominated. However, their data showed
not just the dominance of urchins or algae but also a mosaic of both. They also found
that urchin dominance was depth restricted in many sites, with algae in shallower and
deeper water. They concluded that the phase states “are predictable in space and time
based on the presence or absence of sea otters,” but also that there was “considerable
variation in the composition of species and demography of populations within these
phase states,” apparently due to the “vagaries of foraging sea otters.” Given the great
variation in what they found, another way to view this is that the “phase states” represent end points of a continuum of algal bed structure, and that most states existed
simultaneously across their sites, similar to what Bruno et al. (2009) and others (e.g.,
Selig and Bruno 2010) have argued for coral or algal dominance and phase states on
tropical reefs. It seems clear from Watson and Estes (2011) and many other studies (see
Chapter 9) that sea urchins along the northeastern Pacific can persist in high densities
on open reef for long periods of time only when otters are absent or in low densities,
but the corollary is that almost any state can exist when otters are present, and not just
an alternate state of algal dominance. Similarly, in areas of southern California where
sea otters do not occur, sea urchins can be locally abundant but there is a wide range of
forest types among sites, in which urchins play only a minor role in kelp forest dynamics
at most sites (e.g., Foster and Schiel 1988, Reed et al. 2011). The trophic dynamics–phase
shift argument seems therefore to have limited generality, even in the regional context
of multiple sites. Furthermore, it seems to obfuscate rather than clarify underlying
processes of patch dynamics and community structure.
In Australia, Johnson and colleagues (e.g., Johnson et al. 2003, 2011) have argued for
a “regime shift” affecting the kelp beds and forests of eastern Tasmania. In their case,
however, the “catastrophic phase shift” (Ling et al. 2009) was the result of complex
oceanographic and ecological changes (see Chapter 9). An invasion of the sea urchin
Centrostephanus rodgersii from the Australian mainland occurred when larvae survived
and were transported in the warm-water East Australian Current, which had moved
onshore. The growth of Centrostephanus populations coincided with a natural regression
of giant kelp over several decades, probably due to ocean warming, and severe overfishing of a once-abundant predator, the lobster Jasus edwardsii. In this case, therefore, a
major underlying cause of change was an oceanographic shift but the effects were exacerbated by overfishing and ocean warming. The emphasis of Johnson and colleagues
has been in restoring lobster populations, not least because of their importance to the
local economy, retention of large lobsters that are capable of eating the long-spined
urchins, and consequent restoration of kelp beds to support production (e.g., Johnson
et al. 2005, 2011). This example presents a far more comprehensive perspective of kelp
forest dynamics in seeking to understand the ways in which particular species have

GIANT KELP FORESTS: CONCLUSIONS AND FINAL THOUGHTS

•

309

large effects on community structure, how these relate to environmental changes, the
ways in which a regime shift in the environment can affect change, and, importantly, if
hysteresis—the reversal of unwanted effects—is possible.
These are more than subtle differences in perspectives about alternate states. One
relies on a straightforward trophic model to flip between phases, and the other deals
with the complexities of kelp forest dynamics and their variation. Questions of scale,
within and between site variability in structure and processes must be addressed if we
are to understand the functioning of kelp forests across the many communities that
exist worldwide. Recognizing complexity and incorporating it into models seems more
fruitful than focusing on simple trophic models that emphasize only the end points in
a continuum.

INTE R AC TI O N S

Numerous interactions, of course, affect kelp forest structure within sites. Across the
large literature on kelp forests, the preemption of light by giant kelp canopies is the
most important interaction identified. Canopy shading affects recruitment and growth
of understory kelps and benthic algae within virtually all kelp forests, and this in turn
affects benthic invertebrates. In the kelp forests of the northeastern Pacific, the detrital
fall from kelp forests fuels food webs up to many kilometers outside of kelp forests.
Grazing interactions, particularly by sea urchins, can set upper and lower boundaries
of kelp, and numerous invertebrates can affect fronds. There are many examples of
how these interactions can be important at the scale of patches within forests but are
generally less important at larger scales. Spatial heterogeneity of reef structure, waves,
nutrient provision, etc interact to constrict the co-occurrence of conditions necessary for
most of these smaller-scale processes to have a great influence at larger spatial scales.
Again, fundamentally, giant kelp forests occur if spores are available from a mixture of
adult plants, rock is present, and the physicochemical conditions are suitable.
In trying to understand the status of kelp forest communities, there is no doubt that
our collective reference points are what Paul Dayton has termed “sliding baselines”
(Dayton et al. 1998). Historical overfishing of predators and grazers such as lobsters,
fish, and abalone has removed potentially important trophic linkages in kelp forest
communities. Unfortunately, the ecological roles of many of these species are not well
known. Although key roles have been speculated for them in buffering against outbreaks of sea urchins, Dayton et al. pointed out how little the rest of the community
seems to change when large fishes are extracted. We have seen massive populations of
abalone reduced to small numbers after a few years of fishing, and lamented that their
loss seems to have left few vestiges in the kelp forest community (Schiel 2006). How
can we know what full and functioning communities were like, given these alterations
and compounded with numerous other stressors? A goal of coastal management and
marine protected areas (MPAs) is to restore these species and find out.

31 0

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

MANAGE ME NT

MPAs and marine spatial planning are initiatives to restore the structure and functioning of coastal ecosystems (see Chapter 12). The concept of MPAs and what they are
meant to do have evolved over the years, from setting aside areas for protection and study
to augmenting coastal fisheries to providing connected networks to safeguard coastal
ecosystems from severe localized impacts. None of these goals has been fully realized
yet, but it is clear and no surprise from a few decades of MPAs that target species such
as some fishes, lobsters, and invertebrates have responded positively in abundances and
sizes (Babcock et al. 2010). There is also evidence that sea urchins decline in numbers
on open reef when predators return. “Spillover” effects in augmenting fisheries are
more equivocal, but fishers are known to cluster near the borders of protected areas.
MPAs have therefore been successful on several fronts, not least of which is increasing
public awareness of the beauty and worth of coastal ecosystems.
At the same time, there is awareness of the numerous “goods and services” provided by
coastal ecosystems and their vulnerability to numerous stressors, including alteration to
coastal topography, increasing sediments, nutrient loading, contaminants, and a wide variety of diffuse land-use intensification impacts that affect algal beds worldwide. These sorts
of stressors are not ameliorated by MPAs and yet may pose some of the greatest threats
to coastal ecosystems. There is an increasing awareness that MPAs are necessary but not
sufficient to protect the marine environment from degradation (e.g., Mora and Sale 2011)
and that even in countries with well-developed networks of MPAs like New Zealand there
is still over 90% of the marine environment not in protected areas and subject to a wide
range of usages. The numerous societal benefits provided by the nearshore marine environment include food provision, recreational activities, and ecosystem benefits such as
denitrification, refugia and nurseries for juveniles of many species, and habitat to support
biodiversity. However, nearshore areas are also receiving waters for virtually all catchmentbased land runoff, often resulting in occlusion of the light environment from sediments
and phytoplankton blooms from excess nutrients, impaired recruitment of benthic species, altered structure and functional dynamics and occasional hypoxia, and “dead zones.”
Townsend et al. (2011) argue for an “ecosystems principles approach” whereby ecology is incorporated into goods and services assessments in marine coastal ecosystems.
They list 18 “key general ecosystem principles” relevant to service provision finding, for
example, that services primarily depended on connectivity and that space and resource
occupancy by native species can decrease invasion risk. They argue there is a need for
integration of cross-disciplinary ecology and social science to achieve greater understanding of how human interactions can result in changes to communities and loss of
resilience. Sutherland and Woodroof (2009) argue for “horizon scanning” as a systematic search for potential threats and opportunities that are currently poorly recognized.
For kelp forests, this may well be in the realm of dealing with the complexities of diff use
stressors from land, and increasingly within the context of a changing climate.

GIANT KELP FORESTS: CONCLUSIONS AND FINAL THOUGHTS

•

311

How will we respond and adapt with respect to the problems that beset kelp forests
worldwide? In whatever ways we do, it will take societal buy-in and trade-offs of usages
beyond what we currently have.

THE FU T U R E
H A B I TAT P R E SER VAT I O N

All ecologists have dabbled in the dark arts of prediction, although probably with little
more success than most other professions. History has proven the overwhelming influence of surprises which, by their nature, are not predictable. As Niels Bohr and other
scientific luminaries have noted, “prediction is very difficult, especially if it’s about the
future.” Several current trends, however, are worrisome and bode ill for many of the
earth’s species and ecosystems (e.g., Pimm et al. 2014). Fears of mass extinctions, loss
of habitats, and a changing climate provide a cocktail of gloom in many quarters. An
encouraging sign, therefore, is that giant kelp forests seem to be thriving, despite the
many un-natural stressors to which they are subjected. In doing so, a dominant provider
of temperate reef biogenic habitat is largely intact. It is still provisioning food and detrital webs and, even though some species in forest communities are overly exploited, we
know of no recent extinctions of kelp forest organisms. Preservation of critical habitat
is a major focal area in conservation, and much effort is being expended worldwide to
ensure the future of kelp forest habitats, both for their own sake and for the goods and
services they provide humanity.
From experiments to date, it appears that increasing ocean acidification will not
directly affect Macrocystis, although calcifying organisms may undergo deleterious effects
(see Chapter 13). However, the synergistic effects of climate change, especially as they
affect temperature, nutrients, storms, rainfall, and terrestrial runoff, may well alter kelp
distributions, particularly at the warm-water–low-nutrient margins of their current distributions. The areas where loss of populations seems most likely to occur are along Baja
California, Mexico, parts of southern California, the low-latitude populations of northern
Chile and southern Peru, and along southeastern Australia. Potential gains from the
spread of giant kelp toward the poles are unlikely because populations may be constrained
by day length. Storm frequency and intensity may well play a role in prevention of the
expansion of the range of giant kelp in the colder regions. As indicated by the spread of
Centrostephanus into Tasmania and the substantial changes to community structure seen
in kelp beds in a heated embayment (Schiel et al. 2004), there will no doubt be surprises
that, with our limited knowledge of the biology and ecology of the myriad organisms in
kelp communities, will be difficult and most likely impossible to predict. It seems to us
that the best that can be done is to reduce other, human-caused, effects and hope that
this will reduce some of the synergistic impacts of climate change. As indicated above,
however, the critical feature is the giant kelp habitat itself, without which giant kelp and
most of the other species will be reduced to minor roles (Graham 2004).

312

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

FUTURE RESE ARCH

Most of our knowledge about giant kelp and their communities has come from field
observations and experiments, and focused laboratory experiments based on field studies. There is, however, a growing trend of monitoring studies to feed into better management and achieve a wider knowledge of long-term changes. Many studies make use
of databases from monitoring programs using meta-analyses across usually disparate
studies to seek patterns, often involving management initiatives such as MPAs and
their effects. In our desire and enthusiasm for broad patterns and overarching trends,
we frequently obfuscate the fact that these types of analyses are correlative, often with
weak inference (Platt 1964) and usually factor out significant details, nuances, and complexities. The term meta-analysis was coined to refer to the “statistical analysis of a large
collection of results from individual studies for the purpose of integrating the findings”
(Glass 1976). It may be their purpose, therefore, to rise above the detail, and to integrate
over longer times and a wider range of conditions than generally shorter-term experiments can achieve. However, these types of studies may not necessarily serve us well
when management issues tend to be local or regional, or where detail, nuance, process,
and regional conditions matter. In these circumstances, there is a continuing need for
field work that includes experimentation, and field-driven laboratory studies that are
solidly based on natural history and designed to test key hypotheses.
In our 1985 book, we highlighted the research needs in California as the following:
1

Basic
a.

2

More population studies (recruitment, growth, mortality, etc.) of
“important” kelp forest organisms
b. Studies of the physical processes that structure giant kelp ecosystems
c. Studies of the functional role of biological processes such as competition and predation
Applied
a.
b.
c.

Better understanding of the biological and socioeconomic consequences of sea otter management alternatives
Multispecies approaches to biological and economic modeling
Studies on stock enhancement

Each of these has received attention. We have vastly increased our knowledge of giant
kelp biology and kelp forest ecology, and this is now more broadly based on information
from other regions, especially the significant amount of work done in Chile. In particular, there is now a good understanding of the physical and biological processes that
structure kelp forests in several regions, and we hope this understanding will continue
to broaden as more regions are investigated. Cooperative, cross-disciplinary investigations in more countries using approaches such as those of the Santa Barbara Coastal
Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) would be especially informative, given the great

GIANT KELP FORESTS: CONCLUSIONS AND FINAL THOUGHTS

•

313

increase in knowledge about kelp forests that has come from the LTER. Population
studies of key species will continue to be useful, as they increase our understanding of
the roles of the less iconic species that together make up the diversity of kelp forests.
Some population and community studies that would especially improve understanding
of giant kelp forests are:
1. Giant kelp biology and population dynamics at high latitudes. Modeling
studies indicate that light constrains populations at their current high
latitude limits. Experimental investigations are needed to better test this
hypothesis and examine alternatives, including the effects of competition
with other kelps and the interaction of light and temperature.
2. Microscopic stages. Where do these stages of giant kelp occur in natural
environments, how persistent are they, and how extensive is the role of
delayed development of these stages in recruitment, especially after large
impacts on adults?
3. Ecomorphic variation in giant kelp. With the unification of giant kelp into
one species, how does the great morphological diversity seen across the
ecomorphs occur, given the genetic similarity? How is this affected by
environmental variation? What can finer-scale genetic analyses further
reveal about these differences and connectivity among populations?
4. Regional differences in the ability of sea urchins to cause deforestation. The focus
has been on the differences in predators and their effects on sea urchins.
How important are differences in urchin recruitment, juvenile mortality,
and shelter-oriented behavior among species across regions in forming
and maintaining urchin-dominated sites? Are there regional differences in
the abundance and temporal availability of drift kelp and detrital fall that
produce differences in urchin behavior and grazing effects across regions?
5. Remote giant kelp communities. How do the structure and functioning of
relatively uninvestigated giant kelp communities, especially in the southern hemisphere, compare with what is currently known?
6. Connectivity. We have an understanding of basic processes but not yet a
wider body of research, except for some sites in southern California, on
how connected giant kelp populations are, the relative roles of dispersal via
spores and drifting adults, how density dependent these are on adult populations, and how widely separated populations can recover from large-scale
disturbances. How might connectivity be altered by a changing climate,
such as increased storm activity? These issues of connectivity extend to the
key organisms that interact with giant kelp and affect its abundance and
distribution.
7. Production dynamics of giant kelp. What are the photosynthetic constraints
on giant kelp near the extremes of its distribution? How are the production

314

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

dynamics of giant kelp affected by the often compromised light and nutrient environment of nearshore waters, especially as they relate to climate
change? What is the role of giant kelp as a source of production versus
structure in defining the species composition of kelp forest communities?
8. Nontrophic relationships in community modeling. Can more complexity of
interactions and giant kelp dynamics, other than just somewhat hierarchical predator–grazer controls, be incorporated into community models to
provide more realistic predictions of community variation over space and
time?
9. Global changes in giant kelp distribution and abundance. Satellite and other
remote sensing technologies are now available, and regularly used to assess
giant kelp dynamics in southern California. An international, standardized
program that expands such monitoring to include the entire distribution
of giant kelp would provide important information on regional differences
and insights into the effects of global change.
Although many scientists do not distinguish between basic science and applied science, we distinguish them here as fundamental science and its application. The needs
of applied research tend to be more place-specific than the more fundamental research
outlined above. With reference to our 1985 list, sea otter management by restricting
their expansion into some areas like those with invertebrate fisheries along coastal
southern California was not successful and has been abandoned in favor of letting
otter populations expand naturally, regardless of economic consequences. Otters
remain under full legal protection and there are severe penalties for harassing or killing them. It is not clear that the few attempts at stock enhancement of abalone and
fish populations in California have significantly improved natural stocks, although
these efforts are continuing. It appears that the emphasis worldwide in applied coastal
science is mostly in MPAs. As monitoring programs continue in the hundreds of
protected areas worldwide and we get a longer-term view of effects and effectiveness,
we will undoubtedly refine our understanding of the restorative value of MPAs. In
particular, it would be interesting to see the effects of MPAs on organisms other
than kelp and fished species, especially as the abundances and sizes of formerly
fished species increase. We should also derive a greater understanding by direct comparisons, where possible, with still-exploited control areas. The treating of MPAs as
large-scale manipulative experiments has already yielded significant insights into the
structure and function of protected or less-exploited kelp systems. With the advent of
connected networks of reserves (cf. Gaines, White, et al. 2010, Gaines, Lester, et al.
2010) we should see more cohesive coastal management policies that achieve the evolving goals of MPAs.
We end with a paean for science-based and science-informed management. “Science into management” has often been a one-way street, with the onus on scientists to

GIANT KELP FORESTS: CONCLUSIONS AND FINAL THOUGHTS

•

315

demonstrate the relevance of their research and to work with managers from a wide
range of local, state, and national departments. However, there has been little onus on
managers to base their decisions on best science, and policy decisions are frequently
deficient in sound scientific underpinnings. There is also a wide recognition of the
numerous “stakeholders” who affect and are affected by any management decisions.
Stakeholders include a wide range of commercial, sporting, recreational, cultural, and
societal interests, all of whom tend to have different perspectives on what the problems are and how they are best fi xed, usually involving some other group making
concessions. To overcome some of the adversarial boundaries and barriers, there is an
increasing impetus for stakeholders, managers, and scientists to work together in more
progressive ways in identifying and formulating better management policy. This is challenging, to say the least. It is based on the assumptions that we are all in this together
and that there are few uses that do not impinge in some way on other peoples’ values or
uses, and will undoubtedly involve trade-offs among usages. How this works in practice
remains to be seen, but it is critical that science is viewed as a key to solving problems
and better management. For example, in New Zealand, one of the world leaders in
MPAs and coastal management, the government has instituted National Science Challenges to focus on complex issues by drawing scientists together across disciplines and
institutions to achieve common goals of major benefit to the country. In the marine
arena, this includes enhanced and sustainable use of marine resources within environmental and biological constraints, and understanding the role of the southern ocean
in climate change. The imperative is for scientists to work with relevant stakeholders
and environmental managers to achieve enduring outcomes. The view is long term
and underpinning science is a key component. Just how this will work over the sociopolitico-ecological realm remains to be seen.
In our view, a major achievement to date across the world’s kelp forests and nearshore
marine systems is the recognition that our efforts in solving coastal marine problems
have taken us only so far and that new ways of acting are required. It seems as if we are
at a crossroads in this regard, with government-driven initiatives on one side and more
bottom-up stakeholder / science / management approaches on the other. There is a high
degree of codependency, and how this plays out will be determined over the coming
years. It is indeed fortunate that giant kelp forests have proven to be so remarkably
robust and resilient to most impacts. So long as they continue to survive and thrive,
there is every reason to believe that the diverse and beautiful communities they sustain
will also be maintained in an increasingly stressed environment.

316

•

GLOBAL CHANGE AND THE FUTURE

AFTERWORD

Writing this book has been a pleasant and at times arduous journey through the scientific literature, which has revealed far more depth and quality of science than we
were aware of before we began. We
enjoyed rereading the discoveries of
early kelp forest pioneers, from natural historians and taxonomists to the
first diving scientists. We realized that
our own careers collectively span the
period from these firsthand observers
(MSF was a student of M. Neushul)
through generations of students and
research scientists to the present. But
most of all, we could time travel to the
past to two young students, continents
apart, who wanted to dive, explore, and
make a difference in their research and
vocation. It’s been a fun journey with
The authors (DRS and MSF) after a dive in southern
outstanding students and colleagues,
California ca. 1982. (Cautionary note to young
and the satisfaction of diving in our
students: much of the gear and activities seen and
magnificent giant kelp forests has
implied in this photo are not currently condoned by
never abated.
OSHA).

317

This page intentionally left blank

REFERENCES

Abbott, I. A. and Hollenberg, G. J. 1976. Marine Algae of California. Stanford University
Press, Stanford, CA.
Abbott, D.P. and Haderlie, E.C. 1980. Prosobranchia: Marine snails. Pp. 230–307. In Morris,
R.H., Abbott, D.P., and Haderlie, E.C. (eds), Intertidal Invertebrates of California. Stanford
University Press, Stanford, CA.
Åberg, P. 1992. A demographic study of two populations of the seaweed Ascophyllum nodosum. Ecology 73:1473–1487.
Abesamis, R. A. and Russ, G. R. 2010. Patterns of recruitment of coral reef fishes in a monsoonal environment. Coral Reefs 29:911–921.
Adami, M. L. and Gordillo, S. 1999. Structure and dynamics of the biota associated with
Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyta) from the Beagle Channel, Tierra del Fuego. Scientia
Marina 63:183–191.
Adl, S. M., Simpson, A. G. B., Farmer, M. A., Andersen, R. A., Anderson, O. R., Barta, J. R.
et al. 2005. The new higher level classification of eukaryotes with emphasis on the taxonomy of protists. Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology 52:399–451.
Agardh, C. A. 1820. Species Algarum Rite Cognitae, Cum Synonymis, Differentiis Specifics et
Descriptionibus Succinctis. Berling, Lund, Sweden.
Agardy, T., Bridgewater, P., Crosby, M. P., Day, J., Dayton, R., Kenshington, R. et al. 2003.
Dangerous targets? Unresolved issues and ideological clashes around marine protected
areas. Aquatic Conservation: Marine Freshwater Ecosystems 13:353–367.
Airame, S., Dugan, J. E., Lafferty, K. D., Leslie, H., McArdle, D. A., and Warner, R. R. 2003.
Applying ecological criteria to marine reserve design: a case study from the California
Channel Islands. Ecological Applications 13:170–184.

319

Airoldi, L. 2003. The effects of sedimentation on rocky coast assemblages. Oceanography and
Marine Biology: An Annual Review 41:161–236.
Alberto, F., Whitmer, A., Coehlo, N. C. Zippay, M., Varela-Alvarez, E., Raimondi, P. T. et al.
2009. Microsatellite markers for the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera. Conservation Genetics
10:1915–1917.
Alberto, F., Raimondi, P. T., Reed, D. C., Coehlo, N. C., Leblois, R. W., Whitmer, A. et al. 2010.
Habitat continuity and geographic distance predict population genetic differentiation in
giant kelp. Ecology 91:49–56.
Alberto, F., Raimondi, P. T., Reed, D. C., Watson, J. R., Siegel, D. A., Mitarai, S., et al. 2011.
Isolation by oceanographic distance explains genetic structure for Macrocystis pyrifera in
the Santa Barbara Channel. Molecular Ecology 20:2543–2554.
Albright, L. J., Chocair, J., Masuda, K., and Valdes, M. 1982. Degradation of the kelps Macrocystis intergrifolia and Nereocystis luetkeana in British Columbia coastal waters. Pp. 215–
233. In Srivastava, L. M. (ed.), Synthetic and Degradative Processes in Marine Macrophytes.
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, Germany.
Aleem, A. A. 1956. Quantitative underwater study of benthic communities inhabiting kelp
beds off California. Science 123:183–183.
Alexander, T. J., Barrett, N., Haddon, M., and Edgar, G. 2009. Relationships between mobile
macroinvertebrates and reef structure in a temperate marine reserve. Marine Ecology
Progress Series 389:31–44.
Allison, G. W., Lubchenco, J., and Carr, M. H. 1998. Marine reserves are necessary but not
sufficient for marine conservation. Ecological Applications 8:79–92.
Allison, G. W., Gaines, S. D., Lubchenco, J., and Possingham, H. P. 2003. Ensuring persistence of marine reserves: catastrophes require adopting an insurance factor. Ecological
Applications 13:S8–S24.
Alonso, M. K., Crespo, E. A., Pedraza, S. N., Garcia, N. A., and Coscarella, M. A. 2000. Food
habits of the South American sea lion, Otaria fl avescens, off Patagonia, Argentina. Fishery
Bulletin 98:250–263.
Alonzo, S. H., Key, M., Ish, T., and McCall, A. D. 2004. Status of the California Sheephead
(Semicossyphus pulcher) Stock (2004). Center for Stock Assessment Research, California
Department of Fish and Game, University of California Santa Cruz and National Marine
Fisheries Service, Santa Cruz, CA.
Ambrose, R. F. 1986. Effects of octopus predation on motile invertebrates in a rocky subtidal
community. Marine Ecology Progress Series 30:261–273.
Ambrose, R. F. 1994. Mitigating the effects of a coastal plant on a kelp forest community:
rationale and requirements for an artificial reef. Bulletin of Marine Science 55:694–708.
Ambrose, R. F. and Nelson, B. V. 1982. Inhibition of giant kelp recruitment by an introduced
brown alga. Botanica Marina 25:265–267.
Ambrose, R. F., Engle, J. M., Coyer, J. A., and Nelson, B. V. 1993. Changes in urchin and kelp
densities at Anacapa Island, California. Pp. 199–209. In Hochberg, F. G. (ed.), Third
California Islands Symposium: Recent Advances in Research on the California Islands. Santa
Barbara Museum of Natural History, Santa Barbara, CA.
Ames, J. A. and Morejohn, G. V. 1980. Evidence of white shark, Carcharodon carcharias,
attacks on sea otters, Enhydra lutris. California Fish and Game 66:196–209.

320

•

REFERENCES

Amsler, C. D. and Neushul, M. 1989. Chemotactic effects of nutrients on spores of the kelps
Macrocystis pyrifera and Pterygophora californica. Marine Biology 102:557–564.
Amsler, C. D. and Neushul, M. 1990. Nutrient stimulation of spore settlement in the kelps
Pterogophora californica and Macrocystis pyrifera. Marine Biology 107:297–304.
Amsler, C. D. and Neushul, M. 1991. Photosynthetic physiology and chemical composition
of spores of the kelps Macrocystis pyrifera, Nereocystis leutkeana, Laminaria farlowii, and
Pterygophora californica (Phaeophyceae). Journal of Phycology 27:26–34.
Amster, E., Tiwary, A., and Schenker, M. B. 2007. Case report: potential arsenic toxicosis
secondary to herbal kelp supplement. Environmental Health Perspectives 115:606–608.
Anderson, B. S. and Hunt, J. W. 1988. Bioassay methods for evaluating the toxicity of heavy
metals, biocides and sewage effluent using microscopic stages of giant kelp Macrocystis
pyrifera (Agardh): a preliminary report. Marine Environmental Research 26:113–134.
Anderson, B. S., Hunt, J. W., Turpen, S. L., Coulon, A. R., and Martin, M. 1990. Copper toxicity to microscopic stages of giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera: interpopulation comparisons
and temporal variability. Marine Ecology Progress Series 68:147–156.
Anderson, E. K. and North, W. J. 1966. In situ studies of spore production and dispersal in
the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera. Proceedings of the International Seaweed Symposium
5:73–86.
Anderson, E. K. and North, W. J. 1967. Zoospore release rates in giant kelp Macrocystis. Bulletin of the Southern California Academy of Sciences 66:223–232.
Anderson, N. 1974. A mathematical model for the growth of giant kelp. Simulation 22:97–105.
Anderson, P. K. 1995. Competition, predation and the evolution and extinction of Stellar’s
sea cow, Hydrodamalis gigas. Marine Mammal Science 11:391–394.
Anderson, R. J., Rand, A., Rothman, M. D., Share, A., and Bolton, J. J. 2007. Mapping and
quantifying the South African kelp resource. African Journal of Marine Science 29:369–378.
Anderson, T. J. and Yoklavich, M. M. 2007. Multiscale habitat associations of deepwater
demersal fishes off central California. Fishery Bulletin 105:168–179.
Andrew, N. L. 1988. Ecological aspects of the common sea urchin, Evechinus chloroticus, in
northern New Zealand: a review. New Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research
22:415–426.
Andrew, N. L. and Choat, J. H. 1982. The influence of predation and conspecific adults on
the abundance of juvenile Evechinus chloroticus (Echinoidea, Echinometridae). Oecologia
54:80–87.
Andrew, N. L. and O’Neill, A. L. 2000. Large-scale patterns in habitat structure on subtidal
rocky reefs in New South Wales. Marine and Freshwater Research 51:255–263.
Andrew, N. L. and Underwood, A. J. 1993. Density dependent foraging in the sea urchin
Centrostephanus rodgersii on shallow subtidal reefs in New South Wales, Australia. Marine
Ecology Progress Series 99:89–98.
Andrews, H. L. 1945. The kelp beds of the Monterey region. Ecology 26:24–37.
Arkema, K. K., Reed, D. C., and Schroeter, S. C. 2009. Direct and indirect effects of giant
kelp determine benthic community structure and dynamics. Ecology 90:3126–3137.
Armstrong, F. A. and LaFond, E. C. 1966. Chemical nutrient concentrations and their relationship to internal waves and turbidity off southern California. Limnology and Oceanography 11:538–547.

REFERENCES

•

3 21

Arnold, K. E. and Manley, S. L. 1985. Carbon allocation in Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyta):
intrinsic variability in photosynthesis and respiration. Journal of Phycology 21:154–167.
Astorga, M. P., Hernández, C. E., Valenzuela, C. P., Avaria-Llautureo, J., and Westermeier, R.
2012. Origin, diversification and historical biogeography of the giant kelp genus Macrocystis: evidences from Bayesian phylogenetic analysis. Revista de Biologia y Oceanographia
47:573–579.
Attwood, C. G., Lucas, M. I., Probyn, T. A., McQuaid, C. D., and Fielding, P. J. 1991. Production and standing stocks of the kelp Macrocystis laevis Hay at the Prince Edward Islands,
Subantarctic. Polar Biology 11:129–133.
Babcock, R. C., Kelly, S., Shears, N. T., Walker, J. W., and Willis, T. J. 1999. Changes in community structure in temperate marine reserves. Marine Ecology Progress Series 89:125–134.
Babcock, R. C., Shears, N. T., Alcala, A. C., Barrett, N. S., Edgar, G. E., Lafferty, K. D. et al.
2010. Decadal trends in marine reserves reveal differential rates of change in direct and
indirect effects. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107:18256–18261.
Balch, D. M. 1909. On the chemistry of certain algae of the Pacific Coast. The Journal of
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 1:777–787.
Ballantine, W. J. and Gordon, D. P. 1979. New Zealand’s first marine reserve, Cape Rodney
to Okakiri Point, Leigh. Biological Conservation 15:273–280.
Ballantine, W. J. and Langlois, T. J. 2008. Marine reserves: the need of systems. Hydrobiologia 606:35–44.
Barilotti, D. C. and Silverthorne, W. 1972. A resource management study of Gelidium robustum. Proceedings of the International Seaweed Symposium 7:255–261.
Barilotti, D. C. and Zertuche-González, J. A. 1990. Ecological effects of seaweed harvesting
in the Gulf of California and Pacific Ocean off Baja California and California. Hydrobiologia 204:35–40.
Barilotti, D. C., McPeak, R. H., and Dayton, P. K. 1985. Experimental studies on the effects of
commercial kelp harvesting in central and southern California Macrocystis pyrifera kelp
beds. California Fish and Game 71:4–20.
Barrales, H. and Lobban, C. S. 1975. The comparative ecology of Macrocystis pyrifera with
emphasis on the forests of Chubt, Argentina. Journal of Ecology 63:657–677.
Barrett, N. S., Buxton, C. D., and Edgar, G. J. 2009. Changes in invertebrate and macroalgal
populations in Tasmanian marine reserves in the decade following protection. Journal of
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 370:104–119.
Barry, J. P. and Tegner, M. J. 1990. Inferring demographic processes from size frequency
distributions: simple models indicate specific patterns of growth and mortality. Fishery
Bulletin 88:13–19.
Barsky, K. C. 2001. California spiny lobster. Pp. 98–100. In Leet, W. S., Dewees, C. M.,
Klingbeil, R., and Larson, E. J. (eds), California’s Living Marine Resources: A Status Report.
California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, CA.
Basch, L. V. and Tegner, M. J. 2007. Reproductive responses of purple sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus) populations to environmental conditions across a coastal depth
gradient. Bulletin of Marine Science 81:255–282.
Bascom, W. 1964. Waves and Beaches. Doubleday & Co., Garden City, New York.
Bauhin, J. 1651. Historia Plantarum Universalis. Tomus III. Yverdon, Switzerland.

322

•

REFERENCES

Baum, J. K. and Worm, B. 2009. Cascading top-down effects of changing oceanic predator
abundances. Journal of Animal Ecology 78:699–714.
Bay, S. and Greenstein, D. 1993. Toxic Effects of Elevated Salinity and Desalination Waste
Water. Southern California Coastal Water Research Project Annual Report 1992/1993,
Costa Mesa, CA.
Beas-Luna, R. and Ladah, L. B. 2014. Latitudinal, seasonal, and small-scale spatial differences of the giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, and an herbivore at their southern range limit
in the northern hemisphere. Botanica Marina 57:73–83.
Beckley, L. E. and Branch, G. M. 1992. A quantitative scuba diving survey of the sublittoral
macrobenthos at sub-Antarctic Marion Island. Polar Biology 11:553–563.
Bedford, D. 2001. Giant kelp. Pp. 227–281. In Leet, W. S., Dewees, C. M., Klingbeil, R., and
Larson, E. J. (eds), California’s Living Marine Resources: A Status Report. California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, CA.
Behrens, M. D. and Lafferty, K. D. 2004. Effects of marine reserves and urchin disease
on southern Californian rocky reef communities. Marine Ecology Progress Series
279:129–139.
Benech, S. V. 1980. Observations of the Sea Otter, Enhydris lutris, Population between Point
Buchen and Rattlesnake Creek, San Luis Obispo, California January through December 1980.
ECOMAR Report VII-5-80. ECOMAR Inc., Santa Barbara, CA.
Bernardino, A. F., Smith, C. R., Baco, A., Altamira, I., and Sumida, P. Y. G. 2010. Macrofaunal succession in sediments around kelp and wood falls in the deep NE Pacific and
community overlap with other reducing habitats. Deep-Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic
Research Papers 57:708–723.
Bernstein, B. B. and Jung, N. 1979. Selective pressures and coevolution in a kelp canopy
community in southern California. Ecological Monographs 49:335–355.
Bess, R. and Rallapudi, R. 2007. Spatial confl icts in New Zealand fisheries: the rights of
fishers and protection of the marine environment. Marine Policy 31:719–729.
Beverton, R. J. H. and Holt, S. J. 1957. On the Dynamics of Exploited Fish Populations. Chapman & Hall, New York.
Bird, T. K. and Benson, J. 1987. Seaweed Cultivation for Renewable Resources. Elsevier Science
Ltd, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Birks, J. B. 1962. Rutherford at Manchester. Heywood and Co., London, UK.
Bixler, H. J. and Porse, H. 2011. A decade of change in the seaweed hydrocolloids industry.
Journal of Applied Phycology 23:321–335.
Blackford, J. C. 2010. Predicting the impacts of ocean acidification: challenges from an ecosystem perspective. Journal of Marine Systems 81:12–18.
Blanchette, C. A., Wieters, E. A., Broitman, B. R., Kinlan, B. P., and Schiel, D. R. 2009. Trophic structure and diversity in rocky intertidal upwelling ecosystems: a comparison of
community patterns across California, Chile, South Africa and New Zealand. Progress in
Oceanography 83:107–116.
Blankly, W. O. 1982. Feeding ecology of three inshore fish species at Marion Island (Southern Ocean). South African Journal of Zoology 17:164–170.
Boalch, G. T. 1981. Do we really need to grow Macrocystis in Europe? Proceedings of the International Seaweed Symposium 10:657–667.

REFERENCES

•

3 23

Bohnsack, J. A. 1996. Marine reserves, zoning, and the future of fishery management. Fisheries 21:14–16.
Bolin, R. L. 1938. Reappearance of the southern sea otter along the California coast. Journal
of Mammalogy 19:301–303.
Bolton, J. J. and Levitt, G. J. 1987. The influence of upwelling on South African west coast
seaweeds. South African Journal of Marine Science 5:319–325.
Boolootian, R. A. 1961. The distribution of the California sea otter. California Fish and Game
47:287–292.
Bradley, R. A. and Bradley, D. W. 1993. Wintering shorebirds increase after kelp (Macrocystis)
recovery. Condor 95:372–376.
Brandt, R. P. 1923. Potash from Kelp: Early Development and Growth of Giant Kelp, Macrocystis
pyrifera. United States Department of Agriculture Bulletin No. 1191. United States Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Bray, R. N. 1981. Influence of water currents and zooplankton densities on daily foraging
movements of blacksmith, Chromis punctipinnis, a planktivorous reef fish. Fishery Bulletin
78:829–841.
Bray, R. N., Miller, A. C., and Geesey, G. G. 1981. The fish connection: a trophic link between
planktonic and rocky reef communities. Science 214:204–205.
Bray, R. N., Miller, A. C., Johnson, S., Krause, P. R., Robertson, D. L., and Westcott, A. M.
1988. Ammonium excretion by macroinvertebrates and fishes on a subtidal rocky reef in
southern California. Marine Biology 100:21–30.
Breda, V. A. and Foster, M. S. 1985. Composition, abundance and phenology of foliose red
algae associated with two central California kelp forests. Journal of Experimental Marine
Biology and Ecology 94:115–130.
Breen, P. A. 1987. Seaweeds, sea urchins and lobsters: comment. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 44:1806–1807.
Breen, P. A. and Mann, K. H. 1976. Changing lobster abundance and destruction of kelp
beds by sea urchins. Marine Biology 34:137–142.
Breitburg, D. L. 1984. Residual effects of grazing: inhibition of competitor recruitment by
encrusting coralline algae. Ecology 65:1136–1143.
Brierley, A. S. and Kingsford, M. J. 2009. Impacts of climate change on marine organisms
and ecosystems. Current Biology 19:R602–R614.
Briggs, J. C. 1974. Marine Zoogeography. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Britton-Simmons, K. H. 2004. Direct and indirect effects of the introduced alga Sargassum
muticum on benthic, subtidal communities of Washington State, USA. Marine Ecology
Progress Series 277:61–78.
Britton-Simmons, K. H., Foley, G., and Okamoto, D. 2009. Spatial subsidy in the subtidal
zone: utilization of drift algae by a deep subtidal sea urchin. Aquatic Biology 5:233–243.
Brostoff, W. N. 1988. Taxonomic studies of Macrocystis pyrifera (L) C Agardh (Phaeophyta) in
southern California: holdfasts and basal stipes. Aquatic Botany 31:289–305.
Brown, M. T., Nyman, M. A., Keough, J. A., and Chin, N. K. M. 1997. Seasonal growth of the
giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera in New Zealand. Marine Biology 129:417–424.
Bruno, J. F., Stachowicz, J. J., and Bertness, M. D. 2003. Inclusion of facilitation into ecological theory. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 18:119–125.

324

•

REFERENCES

Bruno, J. F., Sweatman, H., Precht, W. F., Selig, E. R., and Schutte, V. G. W. 2009. Assessing evidence of phase shifts from coral to macroalgal dominance on coral reefs. Ecology
90:1478–1484.
Brzezinski, M. A., Reed, D. C., and Amsler, C. D. 1993. Neutral lipids as major storage products in zoospores of the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyceae). Journal of Phycology 29:16–23.
Brzezinski, M. A., Reed, D. C., Harrer, S., Rassweiler, A., Melack, J. M., Goodridge, B. M.
et al. 2013. Multiple sources and forms of nitrogen sustain year-round kelp growth
on the Inner Continental Shelf of the Santa Barbara Channel. Oceanography 26:
114–123.
Buggeln, R. G., Fensom, D. S., and Emerson, C. J. 1985. Translocation of C-11 photoassimilate
in the blade of Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyceae). Journal of Phycology 21:35–40.
Burgman, M. A. and Gerard, V. 1990. A stage-structured, stochastic population model for
the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera. Marine Biology 105:15–23.
Burridge, T. R. and Bidwell, J. 2002. Review of the potential use of brown algal ecotoxicological assays in monitoring effluent discharge and pollution in Southern Australia. Marine
Pollution Bulletin 45:140–147.
Buschmann, A. H., Vaquez, J., Osorio, P., Reyes, E., Filun, L., Hernandez-González, M. C.
et al. 2004. The effect of water movement, temperature and salinity on abundance and
reproductive patterns of Macrocystis spp. (Phaeophyta) at different latitudes in Chile.
Marine Biology 145:849–862.
Buschmann, A. H., Moreno, C., Vásquez, J. A., and Hernández-González, M. C. 2006.
Reproduction strategies of Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyta) in Southern Chile: the
importance of population dynamics. Journal of Applied Phycology 18:575–582.
Buschmann, A. H., Hernández-González, M. C., and Varela, D. 2008. Seaweed future cultivation in Chile: perspectives and challenges. International Journal of Environment and
Pollution 33:432–456.
Buschmann, A. H., Varela, D., Hernández-González, M., and Huovinen, P. 2008. Opportunities and challenges for the development of an integrated seaweed-based aquaculture
activity in Chile: determining the physiological capabilities of Macrocystis and Gracilaria
as biofi lters. Journal of Applied Phycology 20:571–577.
Buschmann, A. H., Pereda, S. V., Varela, D. A., Hernandez-Gonzalez, M. C., RodriguezMaulen, J., Lopez, A. et al. 2013. Ecophysiological responses of annual populations of
Macrocystis pyrifera under winter light conditions. Phycologia 52:15.
Businessgreen. 2012. Seaweeds offer kelping hand for biofuels. www.businessgreen.com.
Bustamante, R. H., Branch, G. M., and Eekhout, S. 1995. Maintenance of an exceptional
intertidal grazer biomass in South Africa: subsidy by subtidal kelps. Ecology 76:2314–
2329.
Butler, J., Neuman, M., Pinkard, D., Kvitek, R., and Cochrane, G. 2006. The use of multibeam sonar mapping technique to refine population estimates of the endangered white
abalone (Haliotis sorenseni). Fishery Bulletin 104:521–532.
Byrne, M. 2011. Impact of ocean warming and ocean acidification on marine invertebrate life
history stages: vulnerabilities and potential for persistence in a changing ocean. Oceanography and Marine Biology: An Annual Review 49:1–42.

REFERENCES

•

3 25

Byrnes, J. E., Stachowicz, J. J., Hultgren, K. M., Hughes, A. R., Olyarnik, S. V., and Thornber,
C. S. 2006. Predator diversity strengthens trophic cascades in kelp forests by modifying
herbivore behaviour. Ecology Letters 9:61–71.
Byrnes, J. E., Reed, D. C., Cardinale, B. J., Cavanaugh, K. C., Holbrook, S. J., and Schmitt, R. J.
2011. Climate-driven increases in storm frequency simplify kelp forest food webs. Global
Change Biology 17:2513–2524.
Byrnes, J. E., Cardinale, B. J., and Reed, D. C. 2013. Interactions between sea urchin grazing
and prey diversity on temperate rocky reef communities. Ecology 94:1636–1646.
Cailliet, G. M. and Lea, R. N. 1977. Abundance of rare zoarcid, Maynea californica Gilbert,
1915, in Monterey Canyon, Monterey Bay, California. California Fish and Game 63:253–261.
Caissie, B. E., Brigham-Grette, J., Lawrence, K. T., Herbert, T. D., and Cook, M. S. 2010. Last
Glacial Maximum to Holocene sea surface conditions at Umnak Plateau, Bering Sea, as
inferred from diatom, alkenone, and stable isotope records. Paleoceanography 25:PA1206.
doi:10.1029/2008PA001671.
Cameron, F. K. 1915. Potash from kelp. Report No. 100, United States Government Printing
Office, Washington, DC.
Camus, P. A. 1994. Recruitment of the intertidal kelp Lessonia nigrescens Bory in northern
Chile: successional constraints and opportunities. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology
and Ecology 184:171–181.
Camus, P. A. 2001. Marine biogeography of continental Chile. Revista Chilena De Historia
Natural 74:587–617.
Carney, L. T. 2011. A multispecies laboratory assessment of rapid sporophyte recruitment
from delayed kelp gametophytes. Journal of Phycology 47:244–251.
Carney, L. T. and Edwards, M. S. 2006. Delayed development in kelp forest systems. Journal
of Phycology 42:28–28.
Carney, L. T. and Edwards, M. S. 2010. Role of nutrient fluctuations and delayed development in gametophyte reproduction by Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyceae) in southern
California. Journal of Phycology 46:987–996.
Carney, L. T., Waaland, J. R., Klinger, T., and Ewing, K. 2005. Restoration of the bull kelp
Nereocystis luetkeana in nearshore rocky habitats. Marine Ecology Progress Series 302:49–61.
Carney, L. T., Bohonak, A. J., Edwards, M. S., and Alberto, F. 2013. Genetic and experimental evidence for a mixed-age, mixed-origin bank of kelp microscopic stages in southern
California. Ecology 94:1955–1965.
Carr, M. H. 1989. Effects of macroalgal assemblages on the recruitment of temperate zone
reef fishes. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 126:59–76.
Carr, M. H. 1991. Habitat selection and recruitment of an assemblage of temperate zone reef
fishes. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 146:113–137.
Carr, M. H. 1994. Effects of macroalgal dynamics on recruitment of a temperate reef fish.
Ecology 75:1320–1333.
Carr, M. H. 2000. Marine protected areas: challenges and opportunities for understanding
and conserving coastal marine ecosystems. Environmental Conservation 27:106–109.
Carr, M. H. and Reed, D. C. 1993. Conceptual issues relevant to marine harvest refuges:
examples from temperate reef fishes. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences
50:2019–2028.

3 26

•

REFERENCES

Carr, M. H. and Reed, D. C. In press. Shallow rocky reefs and kelp forests. In Zabaleta, E.
(ed.), Ecosystems of California. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Carr, M. H., Neigel, J. E., Estes, J. A., Andelman, S., Warner, R. R., and Largier, J. L. 2003.
Comparing marine and terrestrial ecosystems: implications for the design of coastal
marine reserves. Ecological Applications 13:S90–S107.
Carroll, J. C., Engle, J. M., Coyer, J. A., and Ambrose, R. F. 2000. Long-term changes and
species interactions in a sea urchin dominated community at Anacapa Island, California.
Pp. 370–378. In Browne, D. R., Mitchell, K. L., and Chaney, H. W. (eds), Proceedings of the
5th California Channel Islands Symposium. Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History,
Santa Barbara, CA.
Carter, J. W., Jessee, W. N., Foster, M. S., and Carpenter, A. L. 1985. Management of artificial
reefs designed to support natural communities. Bulletin of Marine Science 37:114–128.
Carter, J. W., Carpenter, A. L., Foster, M. S., and Jessee, W. N. 1985. Benthic succession on an
artificial reef designed to support a kelp reef community. Bulletin of Marine Science 37:
86–113.
Casas, G., Scrosati, R., and Luz Piriz, M. 2004. The invasive kelp Undaria pinnatifida (Phaeophyceae, Laminariales) reduces native seaweed diversity in Nuevo Gulf (Patagonia,
Argentina). Biological Invasions 6:411–416.
Caselle, J. E., Hamilton, S. L., Schroeder, D. M., Love, M. S., Standish, J. D., Rosales-Casian,
J. et al. 2011. Geographic variation in density, demography, and life history traits of a
harvested, sex-changing, temperate reef fish. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences 68:288–303.
Castilla, J. C. 1985. Food webs and functional aspects of the kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, community in the Beagle Channel, Chile. Pp. 407–414. In Siegfried, W. W., Condy, P. R., and Laws,
R. M. (eds), Antarctic Nutrient Cycles and Food Webs. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
Castilla, J. C. 1999. Coastal marine communities: trends and perspectives from humanexclusion experiments. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 14:280–283.
Castilla, J. C. 2000. Roles of experimental marine ecology in coastal management and conservation. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 250:3–21.
Castilla, J. C. and Duran, L. R. 1985. Human exclusion from the rocky intertidal zone of
central Chile: the effects on Concholepas concholepas (Gastropoda). Oikos 45:391–399.
Castilla, J. C. and Fernandez, M. 1998. Small-scale benthic fisheries in Chile: on co-management
and sustainable use of benthic invertebrates. Ecological Applications 8:S124–S132.
Castilla, J. C. and Gelcich, S. 2008. Management of the Loco (Concholepas concholepas) as a
Driver for Self-Governance of Small-Scale Benthic Fisheries in Chile. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 504. FAO, Rome, Italy.
Castilla, J. C. and Moreno, C. 1982. Sea urchins and Macrocystis pyrifera: experimental test of
their ecological relations in southern Chile. Pp. 257–263. In Lawrence, J. M. (ed.), Proceedings of the International Echinoderm Conference, Tampa Bay, Florida.
Castilla, J. C., Uribe, M., Bahamonde, N., Clarke, M., Desqueyroux-Faundez, R., Kong, I.
et al. 2005. Down under the southeastern Pacific: marine non-indigenous species in
Chile. Biological Invasions 7:213-232.
Cavalier-Smith, T. 2010. Kingdoms Protozoa and Chromista and the eozoan root of the
eukaryotic tree. Biology Letters 6:342–345.

REFERENCES

•

3 27

Cavanaugh, K. C., Siegel, D. A., Kinlan, B. P., and Reed, D. C. 2010. Scaling giant kelp field
measurements to regional scales using satellite observations. Marine Ecology Progress
Series 403:13–27.
Cavanaugh, K. C., Siegel, D. A., Reed, D. C., and Dennison, P. E. 2011. Environmental controls of giant-kelp biomass in the Santa Barbara Channel, California. Marine Ecology
Progress Series 429:1–17.
Cavanaugh, K. C., Kendall, B. E., Siegel, D. A., Reed, D. C., Alberto, F., and Assis, J. 2013.
Synchrony in dynamics of giant kelp forests is driven by both local recruitment and
regional environmental controls. Ecology 94:499–509.
CDFG (California Department of Fish and Game). 2005. California Marine Life Protection
Act Initiative Draft Master Plan Framework: A Recommendation to the California Fish and
Game Commission. CDFG, Sacramento, CA.
CDFG (California Department of Fish and Game). 2011. Marine Management News. Pp. 1–10.
California Department of Fish and Game. http://www.dfg.ca.gov/marine/newsletter
/archive.asp.
CDFW (California Department of Fish and Wildlife). 2013. Marine Protected Areas Update.
California Department of Fish and Wildlife. https://nrm.dfg.ca.gov/FileHandler.ashx?
DocumentID=46029&inline=true.
CDFW (California Department of Fish and Wildlife). 2014a. California 14–15 Ocean Sport
Fishing Regulations. California Department of Fish and Wildlife. www.wildlife.ca.gov.
CDFW (California Department of Fish and Wildlife) (2014b) California Commercial Landings Data. California Department of Fish and Wildlife. http://www.dfg.ca.gov/marine
/landings/landings11.asp.
Cerda, O., Karsten, U., Rothausler, E., Tala, F., and Thiel, M. 2009. Compensatory growth
of the kelp Macrocystis integrifolia (Phaeophyceae, Laminariales) against grazing of Peramphithoe femorata (Amphipoda, Ampithoidae) in northern-central Chile. Journal of
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 377:61–67.
Cerda, O., Hinojosa, I. A., and Thiel, M. 2010. Nest-building behavior by the amphipod
Peramphithoe femorata (Kroyer) on the kelp Macrocystis pyrifera (Linnaeus) C. Agardh
from Northern-Central Chile. Biological Bulletin 218:248–258.
Chadwick, N. E. 1991. Spatial distribution and the effects of competition on some temperate
Scleractinia and Corallimorpharia. Marine Ecology Progress Series 70:39–48.
Chapman, A. R. O. 1981. Stability of sea-urchin dominated barren grounds following destructive grazing of kelp in St Margarets Bay, Eastern Canada. Marine Biology 62:307–311.
Chapman, A. R. O. 1984. Reproduction, recruitment and mortality in two species of Laminaria in southwest Nova Scotia. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology
78:99–109.
Chapman, A. R. O. 1986. Age versus stage: an analysis of age-specific and size-specific mortality and reproduction in a population of Laminaria longicruris. Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology 97:113–122.
Chapman, A. R. O. and Craigie, J. S. 1977. Seasonal growth in Laminaria longicruris: relations with dissolved inorganic nutrients and internal reserves of nitrogen. Marine Biology
40:197–205.

328

•

REFERENCES

Chapman, A. R. O. and Lindley, J. E. 1980. Seasonal growth of Laminaria solidungula in the
Canadian high arctic in relation to irradiance and dissolved nutrient concentrations.
Marine Biology 57:1–5.
Chapman, V. J. 1970. Seaweeds and Their Uses. Methuen and Co. Ltd., London, UK.
Chapman, V. J. and Chapman, D. J. 1980. Seaweeds and Their Uses. Chapman & Hall, New
York.
Charters, A. C., Neushul, M., and Barilotti, D. C. 1969. The functional morphology of Eisenia
arborea. Proceedings of the International Seaweed Symposium 6:89–105.
Cheng, T. H. 1969. Production of kelp: a major aspect of China’s exploitation of the sea.
Economic Botany 23:215–236.
Chien, P. K. 1972. Attachment processes and early development by kelp embryos: a light and
electron microscope study. Pp. 108–122. In North, W. J. (ed.), Kelp Habitat Improvement
Project Annual Report 1 July, 1971–30 June, 1972. W.M. Keck Laboratory of Environmental
Health Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA.
Chien, P. K. 1973. Attachment of Macrocystis to natural and artificial substrates. Pp. 89–106.
In North, W. J. (ed.), Kelp Habitat Improvement Project Annual Report 1 July, 1972–30 June,
1973. W.M. Keck Laboratory of Environmental Health Engineering, California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena, CA.
Chin, N. K. M., Brown, M. T., and Heads, M. J. 1991. The biogeography of Lessoniaceae, with
special reference to Macrocystis Agardh, C. (Phaeophyta, Laminariales). Hydrobiologia
215:1–11.
Choat, J. H. and Andrew, N. L. 1986. Interactions amongst species in a guild of subtidal
benthic herbivores. Oecologia 68:387–394.
Choat, J. H. and Ayling, A. M. 1987. The relationship between habitat structure and fish
faunas on New Zealand reefs. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology
110:257–284.
Choat, J. H. and Schiel, D. R. 1982. Patterns of distribution and abundance of large brown
algae and invertebrate herbivores in subtidal regions of northern New Zealand. Journal
of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 60:129–162.
Chung, I. K., Beardall, J., Mehta, S., Sahoo, D., and Stojkovic, S. 2011. Using marine macroalgae for carbon sequestration: a critical appraisal. Journal of Applied Phycology 23:877–886.
Cie, D. K. and Edwards, M. S. 2008. The effects of high irradiance on the settlement competency and viability of kelp zoospores. Journal of Phycology 44:495–500.
Clark, R. P., Edwards, M. S., and Foster, M. S. 2004. Effects of shade from multiple kelp
canopies on an understory algal assemblage. Marine Ecology Progress Series 267:107–119.
Clarke, W. D. 1971. Mysids of the southern kelp region. Pp. 369–380. In North, W. J. (ed.),
The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag Von
J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Clarke, W. D. and Neushul, M. 1967. Subtidal ecology of the southern California coast.
Pp. 29–42. In Olson, T. A. and Burgess, F. J. (eds), Pollution and Marine Ecology. Interscience, New York.
Clements, K. D. and Choat, J. H. 1993. Influence of season, ontogeny and tide on the diet of the
temperate marine herbivorous fish Odax pullus (Odacidae). Marine Biology 117:213–220.

REFERENCES

•

3 29

Clendenning, K. A. 1971a. Photosynthesis and general development in Macrocystis.
Pp. 169–190. In North, W. J. (ed.), The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California.
Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag Von J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Clendenning, K. A. 1971b. Organic productivity in kelp areas. Pp. 259–263. In North, W. J.
(ed.), The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag
Von J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Cloud, P. 1976. Beginnings of biospheric evolution and their biogeochemical consequences.
Paleobiology 2:351–387.
Cock, J. M., Sterck, L., Rouze, P., Scornet, D., Allen, A. E., Amoutzias, G. et al. 2010. The
Ectocarpus genome and the independent evolution of multicellularity in brown algae.
Nature 465:617–621.
Cole, K. 1968. Gametophytic development and fertilization in Macrocystis integrifolia. Canadian Journal of Botany 46:777–782.
Coleman, F. C., Figueira, W. F., Ueland, J. S., and Crowder, L. B. 2004. The impact of United
States recreational fisheries on marine fish populations. Science 305:1958–1960.
Connell, J. H. 1974. Ecology: field experiments in marine ecology. Pp. 21–54. In Mariscal,
R. N. (ed.), Experimental Marine Biology. Academic Press, New York.
Connell, J. H. 1978. Diversity in tropical rain forests and coral reefs. Science 199:1302–1310.
Connell, J. H. and Sousa, W. P. 1983. On the evidence needed to judge ecological stability or
persistence. American Naturalist 121:789–824.
Connell, S. D. 2005. Assembly and maintenance of subtidal habitat heterogeneity: synergistic effects of light penetration and sedimentation. Marine Ecology Progress Series 289:
53–61.
Connell, S. D. 2007. Water quality and the loss of coral reefs and kelp forests: alternative
states and the influence of fishing. Pp. 556–568. In Connell, S. D. and Gillanders, B. M.
(eds), Marine Ecology. Oxford University Press, Sydney, Australia.
Connell, S. D. and Irving, A. D. 2008. Integrating ecology with biogeography using landscape characteristics: a case study of subtidal habitat across continental Australia. Journal
of Biogeography 35:1608–1621.
Contreras, D., Schlatter, R., and Ramirez, C. 1983. Flora ficologica de las Islas Diego
Ramirez (Chile). INACH Ser. Client (Scientifi c Series of the Chilean Antarctic Institute)
30:13–26.
Conversi, A. and McGowan, J. A. 1994. Natural versus human caused variability of water
clarity in the southern California bight. Limnology and Oceanography 39:632–648.
Cook, P. A. and Gordon, H. R. 2010. World abalone supply, markets, and pricing. Journal of
Shellfish Research 29:569–571.
Cooke, S. J. and Cowx, I. G. 2004. The role of recreational fishing in global fish crises. Bioscience 54:857–859.
Cooke, S. J. and Cowx, I. G. 2006. Contrasting recreational and commercial fishing: searching for common issues to promote unified conservation of fisheries resources and aquatic
environments. Biological Conservation 128:93–108.
Cooper, J., Wieland, M., and Hines, A. 1977. Subtidal abalone populations in an area inhabited by sea otters. Veliger 20:163–167.
Costa, D. 1978. The sea otter: its interaction with man. Oceanus 21:24–30.

33 0

•

REFERENCES

Costa, D. P. and Kooyman, G. L. 1984. Contribution of specific dynamic action to heat
balance and the thermoregulation in the sea otter Enhydra lutris. Physiological Zoology
57:199–203.
Cotton, A. D. 1912. Marine algae. Clare Island Survey, Part 15. Proceedings of the Royal Irish
Academy B 31:1–178.
Cousteau, J. and Schiefelbein, S. 2007. The Human, the Orchid, and the Octopus: Exploring
and Conserving Our Natural World. Bloomsbury Publishing, New York.
Cowen, R. K. 1983. The effect of Sheephead (Semicossyphus pulcher) predation on red sea
urchin (Strongylocentrotus franciscanus) populations: an experimental analysis. Oecologia
58:249–255.
Cowen, R. K. 1985. Large scale pattern of recruitment by the labrid, Semicossyphus pulcher:
causes and implications. Journal of Marine Research 43:719–742.
Cowen, R. K., Agegian, C. R., and Foster, M. S. 1982. The maintenance of community structure in a central California giant kelp forest. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and
Ecology 64:189–201.
Cox, T. E. and Foster, M. S. 2013. The effects of storm-drains with periodic flows on intertidal
algal assemblages in ‘Ewa Beach (O’ahu), Hawai’i. Marine Pollution Bulletin 70:162–170.
Coyer, J. A. 1984. The invertebrate assemblage associated with the giant kelp, Macrocystis
pyrifera, at Santa Catalina Island, California: a general description with emphasis on
amphipods, copepods, mysids and shrimps. Fishery Bulletin 82:55–66.
Coyer, J. A., Ambrose, R. F., Engle, J. M., and Carroll, J. C. 1993. Interactions between corals
and algae on a temperate zone rocky reef: mediation by sea urchins. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 167:21–37.
Coyer, J. A., Robertson, D. L., and Alberte, R. S. 1994. Genetic variability within a population and between diploid/haploid tissue of Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyceae). Journal of
Phycology 30:545–552.
Coyer, J. A., Smith, G. J., and Andersen, R. A. 2001. Evolution of Macrocystis spp. (Phaeophyceae) as determined by ITS1 and ITS2 sequences. Journal of Phycology 37:574–585.
Crandall, W. C. 1912. The Kelps of the Southern California Coast. United States 62nd Congress, 2nd Senate Session, Document 190, Appendix N., US Congressional Record,
Washington, DC.
Crandall, W. C. 1915. The kelp beds from lower California to Puget Sound. In Cameron, F. K.
(ed.), Potash from Kelp. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC.
Crandall, W. C. 1918. A review of the kelp industry. California Fish and Game 4:105–107.
Cribb, A. B. 1954. Macrocystis pyrifera (L.) Ag. in Tasmanian waters. Australian Journal of
Marine and Freshwater Research 5:1–34.
Critchley, A. T. and Dijkema, R. 1984. On the presence of the introduced brown algal Sargassum muticum, attached to commercially imported Ostrea edulis in the SW Netherlands.
Botanica Marina 27:211–216.
Critchley, A. T., Farnham, W. F., Yoshida, T., and Norton, T. A. 1990. A bibliography of the
invasive alga Sargassum muticum (Yendo) Fensholt (Fucales; Sargassaceae). Botanica
Marina 33:551–562.
Darwin, C. 1839. The Voyage of the Beagle. (Reprinted in 1962, The Harvard Classics). P.F.
Collier & Son Company, New York.

REFERENCES

•

331

Darwin, C. 1890. Journal of Researches into the Natural History and Geology of the Countries
Visited during the Voyage Round the World of H.M.S. ‘Beagle’ under the Command of Captain Fitzroy. R.N. John Murray, London, UK.
Daume, S., Brand-Gardner, S., and Woelkerling, W. J. 1999. Settlement of abalone larvae
(Haliotis laevigata Donovan) in response to non-geniculate coralline red algae (Corallinales, Rhodophyta). Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 234:125–143.
Daume, S., Brand-Gardner, S., and Woelkerling, W. J. 1999b. Preferential settlement of abalone larvae: diatom fi lms vs. non-geniculate coralline red algae. Aquaculture 174:243–254.
Davenport, A. C. and Anderson, T. W. 2007. Positive indirect effects of reef fishes on kelp
performance: the importance of mesograzers. Ecology 88:1548–1561.
Davis, G. E. 1989. Designated harvest refugia: the next stage of marine fishery management
in California. CalCOFI Reports 30:53–58.
Davis, G. E., Haaker, P. L., and Richards, D. V. 1996. Status and threats of white abalone
at the California Channel Islands. Transactions of the American Fisheries Society
125(1):42–48.
Davis, G. E. 2005. Science and society: marine reserve design for the California Channel
Islands. Conservation Biology 19(6):1745–1751.
Davis, G. E., Haaker, P. L., and Richards, D. V. 1998. The perilous condition of white abalone
Haliotis sorenseni, Bartsch, 1940. Journal of Shellfish Research 17:871–876.
Dawson, E. Y. 1951. A further study of upwelling and associated vegetation along Pacific Baja
California, Mexico. Journal of Marine Research 10:39–58.
Dawson, E. Y., Neushul, M., and Wildman, R. D. 1960. Seaweeds associated with kelp beds
along southern California and northwestern Mexico. Pacific Naturalist 1:1–81.
Day, J., Hockings, M., Holmes, G., Laffoley, D., Stolton, S., and Wells, S. 2012. Guidelines
for Applying the IUCN Protected Areas Management Categories to Marine Protected Areas.
IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.
Dayton, P. K. 1973. Dispersion, dispersal, and persistence of annual intertidal alga, Postelsia
palmaeformis Ruprecht. Ecology 54:433–438.
Dayton, P. K. 1975. Experimental studies of algal canopy interactions in a sea otter dominated kelp community at Amchitka Island, Alaska. Fishery Bulletin 73:230–237.
Dayton, P. K. 1985a. Ecology of kelp communities. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
16:215–245.
Dayton, P. K. 1985b. The structure and regulation of some South American kelp communities. Ecological Monographs 55:447–468.
Dayton, P. K. 2003. The importance of the natural sciences to conservation. American Naturalist 162:1–13.
Dayton, P. K. and Tegner, M. J. 1984. Catastrophic storms, El Niño, and patch stability in a
southern California kelp community. Science 224:283–285.
Dayton, P. K., Currie, V., Gerrodette, T., Keller, B. D., Rosenthal, R., and Ventresca, D. 1984.
Patch dynamics and stability of some California kelp communities. Ecological Monographs 54:253–289.
Dayton, P. K., Seymour, R. J., Parnell, P. E., and Tegner, M. J. 1989. Unusual marine erosion
in San Diego county from a single storm. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 29:151–160.

33 2

•

REFERENCES

Dayton, P. K., Tegner, M. J., Parnell, P. E., and Edwards, P. B. 1992. Temporal and spatial
patterns of disturbance and recovery in a kelp forest community. Ecological Monographs
62:421–445.
Dayton, P. K., Tegner, M. J., Edwards, P. B., and Riser, K. L. 1998. Sliding baselines,
ghosts, and reduced expectations in kelp forest communities. Ecological Applications
8:309–322.
Dayton, P. K., Tegner, M. J., Edwards, P. B., and Riser, K. L. 1999. Temporal and spatial
scales of kelp demography: the role of oceanographic climate. Ecological Monographs
69:219–250.
Dayton, P. K., Sala, E., Tegner, M. J., and Thrush, S. 2000. Marine reserves: parks, baselines,
and fishery enhancement. Bulletin of Marine Science 66(3):617–634.
de Vernal, A., Eynaud, F., Henry, M., Hillaire-Marcel, C., Londeix, L., Mangin, S. et al. 2005.
Reconstruction of sea-surface conditions at middle to high latitudes of the Northern
Hemisphere during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) based on dinoflagellate cyst
assemblages. Quaternary Science Reviews 24:897–924.
Dean, P. R. and Hurd, C. L. 2007. Seasonal growth, erosion rates, and nitrogen and photosynthetic ecophysiology of Undaria pinnatifi da (heterokontophyta) in southern New
Zealand. Journal of Phycology 43:1138–1148.
Dean, T. A. 1985. The temporal and spatial distribution of underwater quantum irradiance in
a southern California kelp forest. Estaurine, Coastal and Shelf Science 21:835–844.
Dean, T. A. and Jacobsen, F. R. 1984. Growth of juvenile Macrocystis pyrifera (Laminariales)
in relation to environmental factors. Marine Biology 83:301–311.
Dean, T. A. and Jacobsen, F. R. 1986. Nutrient-limited growth of juvenile kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, during the 1982-1984 “El Niño” in southern California. Marine Biology
90:597–601.
Dean, T. A. and Deysher, L. E. 1983. The effects of suspended solids and thermal discharges
on kelp. Pp. 114–135. In Bascom, W. (ed.), The Effects of Waste Disposal on Kelp Communities. Southern California Coastal Water Research Project, Long Beach, CA.
Dean, T. A., Deysher, L. E., Theis, K., Lagos, S., Jacobsen, F., and Bost, L. 1983. The Effects
of the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (Song) on the Giant Kelp Macrocystis
Pyrifera: Final Preoperational Monitoring Report. Marine Review Committee Inc., Encinitas, CA.
Dean, T. A., Schroeter, S. C., and Dixon, J. D. 1984. Effects of grazing by two species of sea
urchins (Strongylocentrotus franciscanus and Lytechinus anamesus) on recruitment and
survival of species of kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera and Pterogophora californica). Marine Biology 78:301–313.
Dean, T. A., Thies, K., and Lagos, S. L. 1989. Survival of juvenile giant kelp: the effects of
demographic factors, competitors, and grazers. Ecology 70:483–495.
Dearn, S. L. 1987. The Fauna of Subtidal Articulated Coralline Mats: Composition, Dynamics
and Effects of Spatial Heterogeneity. MSc thesis. California State University, Stanislaus,
CA.
DeBoer, J. A. 1981. Nutrients. Pp. 356–392. In Lobban, C. S. and Wynne, M. J. (eds), The
Biology of Seaweeds. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.

REFERENCES

•

333

Deiman, M., Iken, K., and Konar, B. 2012. Susceptibility of Nerocystis luetkeana (LamNiñariales, Ochrophyta) and Eualaria fistulosa (Laminariales, Ochrophyta) spores to sedimentation. Algae 27:115–123.
Delille, D. and Perret, E. 1991. The influence of giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera on the growth
of sub-Antarctic marine bacteria. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology
153:227–239.
DeMartini, E. E. and Roberts, D. A. 1990. Effects of giant kelp (Macrocystis) on the density and abundance of fishes in a cobble-bottom kelp forest. Bulletin of Marine Science
46:287–300.
Demes, K. W., Graham, M. H., and Suskiewicz, T. S. 2009. Phenotypic plasticity reconciles
incongruous molecular and morphological taxonomies: the giant kelp, Macrocystis (Laminariales, Phaeophyceae) is a monospecific genus. Journal of Phycology 45:1266–1269.
Denny, M. W. and Gaylord, B. 2010. Marine ecomechanics. Annual Review of Marine Science
2:89–114.
Denny, M. W. and Roberson, L. 2002. Blade motion and nutrient flux to the kelp, Eisenia
arborea. Biological Bulletin 203:1–13.
Denny, M. W. and Shibata, M. F. 1989. Consequences of surf-zone turbulence for settlement
and external fertilization. American Naturalist 134:859–889.
Denny, M. W., Gaylord, B., and Cowen, E. A. 1997. Flow and flexibility. II. The roles of size
and shape in determining wave forces on the bull kelp Nereocystis luetkeana. Journal of
Experimental Biology 200:3165–3183.
Denny, M. W., Gaylord, B., Helmuth, B., and Daniel, T. 1998. The menace of momentum:
dynamic forces on flexible organisms. Limnology and Oceanography 43:955–968.
Denny, M. W., Hunt, L. J. H., Miller, L. P., and Harley, C. D. G. 2009. On the prediction of
extreme ecological events. Ecological Monographs 79:397–421.
Department of Conservation and Ministry of Fisheries. 2005. Marine Protected Areas: Policy
and Implementation Plan. Department of Conservation and Ministry of Fisheries, Wellington, New Zealand.
Devinny, J. S. and Volse, L. A. 1978. Effects of sediments on the development of Macrocystis
pyrifera gametophytes. Marine Biology 48:343–348.
Deysher, L. E. 1993. Evaluation of remote-sensing techniques for monitoring giant kelp
populations. Hydrobiologia 261:307–312.
Deysher, L. E. and Dean, T. A. 1984. Critical irradiance levels and the interactive effects of
quantum irradiance and dose on gametogenesis in the giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera.
Journal of Phycology 20:520–524.
Deysher, L. E. and Dean, T. A. 1986a. In situ recruitment of sporophytes of the giant kelp,
Macrocystis pyrifera (L.) C. Agardh: effects of physical factors. Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology 103:41–63.
Deysher, L. E. and Dean, T. A. 1986b. Interactive effects of light and temperature on
sporophyte production in the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera. Marine Biology 93:
17–20.
Dillehay, T. D., Ramirez, C., Pino, M., Collins, M. B., Rossen, J., and Pino-Navarro, J. D.
2008. Monte Verde: seaweed, food, medicine, and the peopling of South America. Science 320:784–786.

33 4

•

REFERENCES

Dixon, J., Schroeter, S. C., and Kastendiek, J. 1981. Effects on the encrusting bryozoan, Membranipora membranacea, on the loss of blades and fronds by the giant kelp, Macrocystis
pyrifera (Laminariales). Journal of Phycology 17:341–345.
Domning, D. 1972. Steller’s sea cow and the origin of North Pacific aboriginal whaling.
Syesis 5:187–189.
Domning, D. P. 1989. Kelp evolution: a comment. Paleobiology 15:53–56.
Doney, S. C., Fabry, V. J., Feely, R. A., and Kleypas, J. A. 2009. Ocean acidification: the other
CO2 problem. Annual Review of Marine Science 1:169–192.
Dong, C. M. and McWilliams, J. C. 2007. A numerical study of island wakes in the Southern
California Bight. Continental Shelf Research 27:1233–1248.
Dong, C. M., Idica, E. Y., and McWilliams, J. C. 2009. Circulation and multiple-scale variability in the Southern California Bight. Progress in Oceanography 82:168–190.
Donner, S. D., Skirving, W. J., Little, C. M., Oppenheimer, M., and Hoegh-Guldberg, O.
2005. Global assessment of coral bleaching and required rates of adaptation under climate change. Global Change Biology 11:2251–2265.
Draget, K., Smidsrød, O., and Skjåk-Bræk, G. 2005. Alginates from algae. Pp. 1–30. In Steinbuchel, A. and Ree, S. (eds), Polysaccharides and Polyamides in the Food Industry. WileyVCH Verlag, Weinheim, Germany.
Dring, M. J. 1981. Chromatic adaptation of photosynthesis in benthic marine algae: an
examination of its ecological significance using a theoretical model. Limnology and
Oceanography 26:271–284.
Dring, M. J. 1987. Stimulation of light: saturated photosynthesis in brown algae by blue light.
British Phycological Journal 22:302–302.
Dromgoole, F. I. 1988. Light fluctuations and the photosynthesis of marine algae. II. Photosynthetic response to frequency, phase ratio and amplitude. Functional Ecology 2:211–219.
Druehl, L. D. 1970. The pattern of Laminariales distribution in the northeast Pacific. Phycologia 9:237–247.
Druehl, L. D. 1973. Marine transplantation. Science 179:12.
Druehl, L. D. 1978. Distribution of Macrocystis integrifolia in British Columbia as related to
environmental parameters. Canadian Journal of Botany 56:69–79.
Druehl, L. D. 1979. An enhancement scheme for Macrocystis integrifolia (Phaeophyceae).
Proceedings of the International Seaweed Symposium 9:79–84.
Druehl, L. D. 1981. Geographical distribution. Pp. 306–325. In Lobban, C. S. and Wynne,
M. J. (eds), The Biology of Seaweeds. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Druehl, L. D. and Breen, P. A. 1986. Some ecological effects of harvesting Macrocystis integrifolia. Botanica Marina 29:97–103.
Druehl, L. D. and Kemp, L. 1982. Morphological and growth responses of geographically
isolated Macrocystis integrifolia populations when grown in a common environment.
Canadian Journal of Botany 60:1409–1413.
Druehl, L. D., Collins, J. D., Lane, C. E., and Saunders, G. W. 2005. An evaluation of methods
used to assess intergeneric hybridization in kelp using Pacific Laminariales (Phaeophyceae). Journal of Phycology 41:250–262.
Dudgeon, S. R., Aronson, R. B., Bruno, J. F., and Precht, W. F. 2010. Phase shifts and stable
states on coral reefs. Marine Ecology Progress Series 413:201–216.

REFERENCES

•

33 5

Dugan, J. 1965. Man under the Sea. Collier Books, New York.
Dugan, J. E. and Davis, G. E. 1993. Applications of marine refugia to coastal fisheries management. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 50:2029–2042.
Dugan, J. E., Hubbard, D. M., McCrary, M. D., and Pierson, M. O. 2003. The response of macrofauna communities and shorebirds to macrophyte wrack subsidies on exposed sandy
beaches of southern California. Estuarine Coastal and Shelf Science 58:25–40.
Dugan, J. E., Hubbard, D. M., Page, H. M., and Schimel, J. P. 2011. Marine macrophyte wrack
inputs and dissolved nutrients in beach sands. Estuaries and Coasts 34:839–850.
Duggins, D. O. 1981. Sea urchin and kelp: the effects of short-term changes in urchin diet.
Limnology and Oceanography 26:391–394.
Duggins, D. O. 1983. Starfish predation and the creation of mosaic patterns in a kelpdominated community. Ecology 64:1610–1619.
Duggins, D. O., Eckman, J. E., and Sewell, A. T. 1990. Ecology of understory kelp environments II. Effects of kelp on recruitment of benthic invertebrates. Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology 143:27–45.
Duggins, D. O., Eckman, J. E., Siddon, C. E., and Klinger, T. 2003. Population, morphometric and biomechanical studies of three understory kelps along a hydrodynamic gradient.
Marine Ecology Progress Series 265:57–76.
Dunton, K. H. 1990. Growth and production in Laminaria solidungula in relation to continuous underwater light levels in the Alaskan high arctic. Marine Biology 106:297–304.
Dunton, K. H. and Schell, D. M. 1986. Seasonal carbon budget and growth of Laminaria
solidungula in the Alaskan high arctic. Marine Ecology Progress Series 31:57–66.
Dupont, S., Dorey, N., Stumpp, M., Melzner, F., and Thorndyke, M. 2013. Long-term and
trans-life-cycle effects of exposure to ocean acidification in the green sea urchin Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis. Marine Biology 160:1835–1843.
Dupont, S. and Pörtner, H. O. 2013. A snapshot of ocean acidification research. Marine Biology 160:1765–1771.
Ebeling, A. W., Larson, R. J., and Alevizon, W. S. 1980. Habitat groups and island-mainland
distribution of kelp-bed fishes off Santa Barbara, California. Pp. 404–431. In Power, D. M.
(ed.), Multidisciplinary Symposium on the California Islands. Santa Barbara Museum of
Natural History, Santa Barbara, CA.
Ebeling, A. W., Laur, D. R., and Rowley, R. J. 1985. Severe storm disturbances and reversal of
community structure in a southern California kelp forest. Marine Biology 84:287–294.
Ebert, T. A. 1968. Growth rates of sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus related to food
availability and spine abrasion. Ecology 49:1075–1091.
Ebert, T. A. 1983. Recruitment in echinoderms. Pp. 169–203. In Lawrence, J. M. (ed.), Echinoderm Studies, Vol. 1. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Ebert, T. A. and Southon, J. R. 2003. Red sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus franciscanus) can
live over 100 years: confirmation with A-bomb (14) carbon. Fishery Bulletin 101:915–922.
Ebert, T. A., Schroeter, S. C., and Dixon, J. D. 1993. Inferring demographic processes from
size frequency distributions: effect of pulsed recruitment on simple models. Fishery Bulletin 91:237–243.
Edgar, G. J. 1987. Dispersal of faunal and floral propagules associated with drifting Macrocystis pyrifera plants. Marine Biology 95:599–610.

33 6

•

REFERENCES

Edgar, G. J. and Barrett, N. S. 1999. Effects of the declaration of marine reserves on Tasmanian reef fishes, invertebrates and plants. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and
Ecology 242:107–144.
Edgar, G. J., Barrett, N. S., Morton, A. J., and Samson, C. R. 2004. Effects of algal canopy
clearance on plant, fish and macroinvertebrate communities on eastern Tasmanian reefs.
Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 312:67–87.
Edmeades, D. C. 2002. The effects of liquid fertilisers derived from natural products on
crop, pasture, and animal production: a review. Australian Journal of Agriculture Research
53:965–976.
Edwards, M. and Richardson, A. J. 2004. Impact of climate change on marine pelagic phenology and trophic mismatch. Nature 430:881–884.
Edwards, M. S. 1998. Effects of long-term kelp canopy exclusion on the abundance of the
annual alga Desmarestia ligulata (Light F). Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and
Ecology 228:309–326.
Edwards, M. S. 1999. Using in situ substratum steralization and fluorescence microscopy
in studies of microscopic stages of marine macroalgae. Hydrobiologia 398–399:253–259.
Edwards, M. S. 2000. The role of alternate life-history stages of a marine macroalga: a seed
bank analogue? Ecology 81:2404–2415.
Edwards, M. S. 2004. Estimating scale-dependency in disturbance impacts: El Niños and
giant kelp forests in the northeast Pacific. Oecologia 138:436–447.
Edwards, M. S. and Hernández-Carmona, G. 2005. Delayed recovery of giant kelp near
its southern range limit in the North Pacific following El Niño. Marine Biology
147:273–279.
Edwards, M. S. and Estes, J. A. 2006. Catastrophe, recovery and range limitation in E Pacific
kelp forests: a large-scale perspective. Marine Ecology Progress Series 320:79–87.
Edyvane, K. 2003. Conservation, Monitoring and Recovery of Threatened Giant Kelp (Macrocystis Pyrifera) Beds in Tasmania: Final Report. Department of Primary Industries, Water
and Environment, Hobart, Australia.
Elner, R. W. and Vadas, R. L. 1990. Inference in ecology: the sea urchin phenomenon in the
Northwestern Atlantic. American Naturalist 136:108–125.
Elton, C. S. 1927. Animal Ecology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Engelen, A. and Santos, R. 2009. Which demographic traits determine population growth
in the invasive brown seaweed Sargassum muticum? Journal of Ecology 97:675–684.
Erlandson, J. M., Rick, T. C., Estes, J. A., Graham, M. H., Braje, T. J., and Vellanoweth,
R. L. 2005. Sea otters, shellfish, and humans: 10,000 years of ecological interaction on
San Miguel Island, California. Pp. 58–68. In Garcecon, D. K. and Schwemm, C. A. (eds),
Proceedings of the Sixth California Islands Symposium. Institute for Wildlife Studies,
Aracata, CA.
Erlandson, J. M., Graham, M. H., Bourque, B. J., Corbett, D., Estes, J. A., and Steneck, R. S.
2007. The kelp highway hypothesis: marine ecology, the coastal migration theory, and
the peopling of the Americas. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 2:161–174.
Erlandson, J. M., Rick, T. C., Braje, T. J., Steinberg, A., and Vellanoweth, R. L. 2008. Human
impacts on ancient shellfish: a 10,000 year record from San Miguel Island, California.
Journal of Archaeological Science 35:2144–2152.

REFERENCES

•

33 7

Eschmeyer, W. N., Herald, E. S., and Hamman, H. 1983. A Field Guide to Pacific Coast Fishes
of North America. Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, MA.
Estes, J. A. and Duggins, D. O. 1995. Sea otters and kelp forests in Alaska: generality and
variation in a community ecological paradigm. Ecological Monographs 65:75–100.
Estes, J. A. and Harrold, C. 1988. Sea otters, sea urchins and kelp beds: some questions of
scale. Pp. 116–150. In VanBlaricom, G. R. and Estes, J. A. (eds), The Community Ecology of
Sea Otters. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
Estes, J. A. and Palmisano, J. 1974. Sea otters: their role in structuring nearshore communities. Science 185:1058–1060.
Estes, J. A. and Steinberg, P. D. 1988. Predation, herbivory and kelp evolution. Paleobiology
14:19–36.
Estes, J. A. and Van Blaricom, G. R. 1985. Sea otters and shell fisheries. Pp. 187–235. In
Beverton, R. H., Lavigne, D., and Beddington, J. (eds), Conflicts between Marine Mammals
and Fisheries. Allen and Unwin, London, UK.
Estes, J. A., Smith, N. S., and Palmisano, J. F. 1978. Sea otter predation and community organization in western Aleutian Islands, Alaska. Ecology 59:822–833.
Estes, J. A., Jameson, R. J., and Rhode, E. B. 1982. Activity and prey selection in the sea
otter: influence of population status on community structure. The American Naturalist
120:242–258.
Estes, J. A., Tinker, M. T., Williams, T. M., and Doak, D. F. 1998. Killer whale predation on sea
otters linking oceanic and nearshore ecosystems. Science 282:473–476.
Estes, J. A., Hatfield, B. B., Ralls, K., and Ames, J. 2003. Causes of mortality in California
sea otters during periods of population growth and decline. Marine Mammal Science
19:198–216.
Estes, J. A., Terborgh, J., Brashares, J. S., Power, M. E., Berger, J., Bond, W. J. et al. 2011.
Trophic downgrading of planet earth. Science 333:301–306.
Fagerli, C. W., Norderhaug, K. M., and Christie, H. C. 2013. Lack of sea urchin settlement
may explain kelp forest recovery in overgrazed areas in Norway. Marine Ecology Progress
Series 488:119–132.
Fain, S. R. and Murray, S. N. 1982. Effects of light and temperature on net photosynthesis
and dark respiration of gametophytes and embryonic sporophytes of Macrocystis pyrifera.
Journal of Phycology 18:92–98.
Fankboner, P. V. and Druehl, L. D. 1976. In situ accumulation of marine algal exudate by a
polychaete worm (Schizobranchia insignis). Experientia 32:1391–1392.
Fargione, P. V., Hill, J., Tilman, D., Polasky, S., and Hawthorne, P. 2008. Land clearing and
the biofuel carbon debt. Science 319:1235–1238.
Feehan, C., Scheibling, R. E., and Lauzon-Guay, J. S. 2012. An outbreak of sea urchin disease
associated with a recent hurricane: support for the “killer storm hypothesis” on a local
scale. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 413:159–168.
Fejtek, S. M., Edwards, M. S., and Kim, K. Y. 2011. Elk kelp, Pelagophycus porra, distribution
limited due to susceptibility of microscopic stages to high light. Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology 396:194–201.
Fernández, E., Cordova, C., and Tarazona, J. 1999. Condiciones de la pradera submareal
de Lessonia trabeculata en La Isla Independence durante “El Niño 1997-98”. Pp. 47–59.

33 8

•

REFERENCES

In Tarazona, J. and Castillo, E. (eds), El Niño 1997-98 y su impacto sobre los Ecosistemas
Marino y Terrestre, Revista peruana de biologia volume estraordinario. Facultad de Ciencias
Biologicas UNMSM, Lima, Peru. (in Spanish)
Fernández, M. and Castilla, J. C. 2005. Marine conservation in Chile: historical perspective,
lessons, and challenges. Conservation Biology 19:1752–1762.
Field, J. G. and Griffiths, C. L. 1991. Littoral and sublittoral ecosystems of southern Africa.
Pp. 323–346. In Mathieson, A. C. and Nienhuis, P. H. (eds), Ecosystems of the World 24:
Intertidal and Littoral Ecosystems. Elsevier, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Filbee-Dexter, K. and Scheibling, R. E. 2014. Sea urchin barrens as alternative stable states
of collapsed kelp ecosystems. Marine Ecology Progress Series 495:1–25.
Fink, L. A. and Manley, S. L. 2011. The use of kelp sieve tube sap metal composition to characterize urban runoff in southern California coastal waters. Marine Pollution Bulletin
62:2619–2632.
Fisher, E. M. 1939. Habits of the southern sea otter. Journal of Mammalogy 20:21–36.
Fletcher, R. L. and Callow, M. E. 1992. The settlement, attachment and establishment of
marine algal spores. British Phycological Journal 27:303–329.
Floerl, O., Inglis, G. J., and Hayden, B. J. 2005. A risk-based predictive tool to prevent accidental introductions of nonindigenous marine species. Environmental Management
35:765–778.
Flores-Aguilar, R. A., Gutierrez, A., Ellwanger, A., and Searcy-Bernal, R. 2007. Development
and current status of abalone aquaculture in Chile. Journal of Shellfish Research 26:705–711.
Flowers, J. M., Schroeter, S. C., and Burton, R. S. 2002. The recruitment sweepstakes has
many winners: genetic evidence from the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus. Evolution 56:1445–1453.
Foley, M. M., Halpern, B. S., Micheli, F., Armsby, M. H., Caldwell, M. R., Crain, C. M. et al.
2010. Guiding ecological principles for marine spatial planning. Marine Policy 34:955–966.
Foster, M. S. 1972. The algal turf community in the nest of the ocean goldfish (Hypsypops
rubicunda). Proceedings of the International Seaweed Symposium 7:55–60.
Foster, M. S. 1975a. Regulation of algal community development in a Macrocystis pyrifera
forest. Marine Biology 32:331–342.
Foster, M. S. 1975b. Algal succession in a Macrocystis pyrifera forest. Marine Biology
32:313–329.
Foster, M. S. 1982. The regulation of macroalgal associations in kelp forests. Pp. 185–205. In
Srivastava, L. M. (ed.), Synthetic and Degradative Processes in Marine Macrophytes. Walter
de Gruyter, Berlin, Germany.
Foster, M. S. and Holmes, R. W. 1977. The Santa Barbara oil spill: an ecological disaster?
Pp. 166–190. In Cairns, J., Dickson, K. L., and Herricks, E. E. (eds), Recovery and
Restoration of Damaged Ecosystems. University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.
Foster, M. S. and Schiel, D. R. 1985. The Ecology of Giant Kelp Forests in California: A Community Profile. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Biological Report 85 (7.2), U.S. Government
Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Foster, M. S. and Schiel, D. R. 1988. Kelp communities and sea otters: keystone species or
just another brick in the wall? Pp. 92–115. In VanBlaricom, G. R. and Estes, J. A. (eds), The
Community Ecology of Sea Otters. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.

REFERENCES

•

33 9

Foster, M. S. and Schiel, D. R. 1993. Zonation, El Niño disturbance, and the dynamics of subtidal vegetation along a 30 m depth gradient in two giant kelp forests. Pp. 151–162. In Battershill, C. N., Schiel, D. R., Jones, G. P., Creese, R. G., and MacDiarmid, A. B. (eds), Proceedings
of the Second International Temperate Reef Symposium. NIWA Marine, Wellington, New
Zealand.
Foster, M. S. and Schiel, D. R. 2010. Loss of predators and the collapse of southern California
kelp forests (?): alternatives, explanations and generalizations. Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology 393:59–70.
Foster, M. S. and VanBlaricom, G. R. 2001. Spatial variation in kelp forest communities
along the Big Sur coast of central California, USA. Cryptogamie, Algologie 22:173–186.
Foster, M. S., Neushul, M., and Charters, A. C. 1971. The Santa Barbara oil spill. I. Initial
quantities and distribution of pollutant crude oil. Environmental Pollution 2:97–113.
Foster, M. S., Neushul, M., and Zingmark, R. 1971b. The Santa Barbara oil spill. II. Initial
effects on littoral and kelp bed organisms. Environmental Pollution 2:115–134.
Foster, M. S., Schiel, D. R., and Carter, J. W. 1983. Ecology of kelp communities. Pp. 53–69. In
Bascom, W. (ed.), The Effects of Waste Disposal on Kelp Communities. Southern California
Coastal Water Research Project, Long Beach, CA.
Foster, M. S., DeVogelaere, A. P., Harrold, C., Pearse, J. S., and Thum, A. B. 1988. Causes of
Spatial and Temporal Patterns in Rocky Intertidal Communities of Central and Northern
California. Memoirs of the California Academy of Sciences Number 9. California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, CA.
Foster, M. S., Edwards, M. S., Reed, D. C., Schiel, D. R., and Zimmerman, R. C. 2006. Topdown vs. bottom-up effects in kelp forests. Science 313:1737–1738.
Foster, M. S., Reed, D. C., Carr, M. H., Dayton, P. K., Malone, D. P., and Pearse, J. C. 2013. Kelp
Forests in California. Research and Discoveries: The Revolution of Science through SCUBA,
Smithsonian Contributions in Marine Sciences. Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press,
Washington, DC.
Fox, C. H. and Swanson, A. K. 2007. Nested PCR detection of microscopic life-stages of laminarian macroalgae and comparison with adult forms along intertidal height gradients.
Marine Ecology Progress Series 332:1–10.
Fox, M. D. 2013. Resource translocation drives δ13C fractionation during recovery from disturbance in giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera. Journal of Phycology 49:811–815.
Fram, J. P., Stewart, H. L., Brzezinski, M. A., Gaylord, B., Reed, D. C., Williams, S. L. et al.
2008. Physical pathways and utilization of nitrate supply to the giant kelp, Macrocystis
pyrifera. Limnology and Oceanography 53:1589–1603.
Frank, K. T., Petrie, B., Choi, J. S., and Leggett, W. C. 2005. Trophic cascades in a formerly
cod-dominated ecosystem. Science 308:1621–1623.
Frantz, B. R., Foster, M. S., and Riosmena-Rodríguez, R. 2005. Clathromorphum
nereostratum (Corallinales, Rhodophyta): the oldest alga? Journal of Phycology 41:
770–773.
Fraser, C. I., Nikula, R., Spencer, H. G., and Waters, J. M. 2009. Kelp genes reveal effects
of subantarctic sea ice during the Last Glacial Maximum. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 106:3249–3253.

340

•

REFERENCES

Fraser, C. I., Winter, D. J., Spencer, H. G., and Waters, J. M. 2010. Multigene phylogeny of
the southern bull-kelp Durvillaea (Phaeophyceae: Fucales). Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution 57:1301–1311.
Fritsch, F. E. 1945. The Structure and Reproduction of the Algae. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Frusher, S. D. 1997. Stock Assessment Report: Rock Lobster. Government of Tasmania, Australia, Internal report No. 35. Tasmanian Department of Primary Industry and Fisheries,
Hobart, Australia.
Fukuhara, Y., Mizuta, H., and Yasui, H. 2002. Swimming activities of zoospores in Laminaria japonica (Phaeophyceae). Fisheries Science 68:1173–1181.
Fyfe, J. C. and Saenko, O. A. 2005. Human-induced change in the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current. Journal of Climate 18:3068–3073.
Gaines, S. D. and Lubchenco, J. 1982. A unified approach to marine plant-herbivore interactions 2. Biogeography. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 13:111–138.
Gaines, S. D. and Roughgarden, J. 1987. Fish in offshore kelp forests affect recruitment to
intertidal barnacle populations. Science 235:479–481.
Gaines, S. D., Gaylord, B., and Largier, J. L. 2003. Avoiding current oversights in marine
reserve design. Ecological Applications 13(S1):S32–S46.
Gaines, S. D., White, C., Carr, M. H., and Palumbi, S. R. 2010. Designing marine reserve
networks for both conservation and fisheries management. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 107:18286–18293.
Gaines, S. D., Lester, S. E., Grorud-Colvert, K., Costello, C., and Pollnac, R. 2010. Evolving
science of marine reserves: new developments and emerging research frontiers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107:18251–18255.
Garbary, D. J., Kim, K. Y., Klinger, T., and Duggins, D. 1999. Red algae as hosts for endophytic kelp gametophytes. Marine Biology 135:35–40.
Garland, C. D., Cooke, S. L., Grant, J. F., and McMeekin, T. A. 1985. Ingestion of the bacteria
on and the cuticle of crustose (non-articulated) coralline algae by post-larval and juvenile
abalone (Haliotis ruber Leach) from Tasmanian waters. Journal of Experimental Marine
Biology and Ecology 91:137–149.
Gaylord, B. and Denny, M. W. 1997. Flow and flexibility. I. Effects of size, shape and stiffness in determining wave forces on the stipitate kelps Eisenia arborea and Pterogophora
californica. Journal of Experimental Biology 200:3141–3164.
Gaylord, B. and Gaines, S. D. 2000. Temperature or transport? Range limits in marine species mediated solely by flow. American Naturalist 155:769–789.
Gaylord, B., Reed, D. C., Raimondi, P. T., Washburn, L., and McLean, S. R. 2002. A physically
based model of macroalgal spore dispersal in the wave and current-dominated nearshore.
Ecology 83:1239–1251.
Gaylord, B., Denny, M. W., and Koehl, M. A. R. 2003. Modulation of wave forces on kelp
canopies by alongshore currents. Limnology and Oceanography 48:860–871.
Gaylord, B., Reed, D. C., Washburn, L., and Raimondi, P. T. 2004. Physical-biological
coupling in spore dispersal of kelp forest macroalgae. Journal of Marine Systems 49:
19–39.

REFERENCES

•

3 41

Gaylord, B., Reed, D. C., Raimondi, P. T., and Washburn, L. 2006a. Macroalgal spore dispersal in coastal environments: mechanistic insights revealed by theory and experiment.
Ecological Monographs 76:481–502.
Gaylord, B., Reed, D. C., Raimondi, P. T., and Washburn, L. 2006b. Ecomechanics of macroalgal spore dispersal in coastal environments: insights from theory and experiment.
Integrative and Comparative Biology 46:E47.
Gaylord, B., Rosman, J. H., Reed, D. C., Koseff, J. R., Fram, J., MacIntyre, S. et al. 2007.
Spatial patterns of flow and their modification within and around a giant kelp forest.
Limnology and Oceanography 52:1838–1852.
Gaylord, B., Denny, M. W., and Koehl, M. A. R. 2008. Flow forces on seaweeds: field evidence
for roles of wave impingement and organism inertia. Biological Bulletin 215:295–308.
Gaylord, B., Nickols, K. J., and Jurgens, L. 2012. Roles of transport and mixing processes in
kelp forest ecology. Journal of Experimental Biology 215:997–1007.
Geange, S. W. 2014. Growth and reproductive consequences of photosynthetic tissue loss in
the surface canopies of Macrocystis pyrifera (L.) C. Agardh. Journal of Experimental Marine
Biology and Ecology 453:70–75.
Gell, F. R. and Roberts, C. M. 2003. Benefits beyond boundaries: the fishery effects of marine
reserves. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 18:448–455.
Gerard, V. A. 1976. Some Aspects of Material Dynamics and Energy Flow in a Kelp Forest in
Monterey Bay, California. PhD thesis. University of California, Santa Cruz.
Gerard, V. A. 1982a. Growth and utilization of internal nitrogen reserves by the giant kelp
Macrocystis pyrifera in a low-nutrient environment. Marine Biology 66:27–35.
Gerard, V. A. 1982b. In situ rates of nitrate uptake by giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera (L) C
Agardh: tissue differences, environmental effects, and predictions of nitrogen limited
growth. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 62:211–224.
Gerard, V. A. 1982c. In situ water motion and nutrient uptake by the giant kelp Macrocystis
pyrifera. Marine Biology 69:51–54.
Gerard, V. A. 1984. The light environment in a giant kelp forest: influence of Macrocystis
pyrifera on spatial and temporal variability. Marine Biology 84:189–195.
Gerard, V. A. and Kirkman, H. 1984. Ecological observations on a branched, loose-lying
form of Macrocystis pyrifera (L.) C. Agardh in New Zealand. Botanica Marina 27:105–109.
Gerard, V. A. and North, W. J. 1984. Measuring growth, production, and yield of the giant
kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera. Hydrobiologia 116:321–324.
Gerrodette, T. 1979. Equatorial submergence in a solitary coral, Balanophyllia elegens, and
the critical life stage excluding the species from shallow-water in the south Marine Ecology Progress Series 1:227–235.
Ghelardi, R. J. 1971. “Species” structure of the animal community that lives in Macrocystis
pyrifera holdfasts. Pp. 381–420. In North, W. J. (ed.), The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag Von J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Gilles, K. W. and Pearse, J. S. 1986. Studies on disease in sea urchins, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus: experimental infection and bacterial virulence. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms 1:105–114.
Glass, G. V. 1976. Primary, secondary, and meta-analysis of research. Educational Researcher
5:3–8.

342

•

REFERENCES

Godoy, N., Gelcich, S., Vásquez, J. A., and Castilla, J. C. 2010. Spearfishing to depletion:
evidence from temperate reef fishes in Chile. Ecological Applications 20:1504–1511.
Goldberg, N. A. and Foster, M. S. 2002. Settlement and post-settlement processes limit
the abundance of the geniculate coralline alga Calliarthron on subtidal walls. Journal of
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 278:31–45.
Gordon, B. L. 1974. Monterey Bay Area: Natural History and Cultural Imprints. Boxwood
Press, Pacific Grove, CA.
Gorman, D., Russell, B. D., and Connell, S. D. 2009. Land-to-sea connectivity: linking
human-derived terrestrial subsidies to subtidal habitat change on open rocky coasts.
Ecological Applications 19:1114–1126.
Grabitske, H. A. and Slavin, J. L. 2008. Low-digestible carbohydrates in practice. Journal of
the American Dietetic Association 108:1677–1681.
Graham, L. E. and Wilcox, L. W. 2000. Algae. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Graham, L. E., Graham, J. E., and Wilcox, L. W. 2009. Algae. 2nd ed. Benjamin Cummings
(Pearson), San Francisco, CA.
Graham, M. H. 1997. Factors determining the upper limit of giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera
Agardh, along the Monterey Peninsula, central California, USA. Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology 218:127–149.
Graham, M. H. 1999. Identification of kelp zoospores from in situ plankton samples. Marine
Biology 135:709–720.
Graham, M. H. 2002. Prolonged reproductive consequences of short-term biomass loss in
seaweeds. Marine Biology 140:901–911.
Graham, M. H. 2003. Coupling propagule output to supply at the edge and interior of a giant
kelp forest. Ecology 84:1250–1264.
Graham, M. H. 2004. Effects of local deforestation on the diversity and structure of southern
California giant kelp forest food webs. Ecosystems 7:341–357.
Graham, M. H. and Mitchell, B. G. 1999. Obtaining absorption spectra from individual macroalgal spores using microphotometry. Hydrobiologia 399:231–239.
Graham, M. H., Harrold, C., Lisin, S., Light, K., Watanabe, J. M., and Foster, M. S. 1997.
Population dynamics of giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera along a wave exposure gradient.
Marine Ecology Progress Series 148:269–279.
Graham, M. H., Dayton, P. K., and Erlandson, J. M. 2003. Ice ages and ecological transitions
on temperate coasts. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 18:33–40.
Graham, M. H., Vásquez, J. A., and Buschmann, A. H. 2007. Global ecology of the giant kelp
Macrocystis: from ecotypes to ecosystems. Oceanography and Marine Biology: An Annual
Review 45:39–88.
Graham, M. H., Kinlan, B. P., Druehl, L. D., Garske, L. E., and Banks, S. 2007. Deep-water
kelp refugia as potential hotspots of tropical marine diversity and productivity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104:16576–16580.
Graham, M. H., Halpern, B. S., and Carr, M. H. 2008. Diversity and dynamics of
Californian subtidal kelp forests. Pp. 103–134. In McClanahan, T. R. and Branch,
G. M. (eds), Food Webs and the Dynamics of Marine Reefs. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK.

REFERENCES

•

3 43

Graham, M. H., Kinlan, B. P., and Grosberg, R. K. 2010. Post-glacial redistribution and shifts
in productivity of giant kelp forests. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
277:399–406.
Grall, J., Le Loc’h, F., Guyonnet, B., and Riera, P. 2006. Community structure and food web
based on stable isotopes (δ15 N and δ13 C) analysis of a North Eastern Atlantic maerl bed.
Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 338:1–15.
Grenville, D. J., Peterson, R. L., Barrales, H. L., and Gerrath, J. F. 1982. Structure and development of the secretory cells and duct system in Macrocystis pyrifera (L.) Agardh, C.A.
Journal of Phycology 18:232–240.
Grigg, R. W. 1975. Age structure of a longevous coral: relative index of habitat suitability and
stability. American Naturalist 109:647–657.
Grig, R. W. and Kiwala, R. S. 1970. Some ecological effects of discharged wastes on marine
life. California Fish and Game 56:145–155.
Grove, R. S., Zabloudil, K., Norall, T., and Deysher, L. 2002. Effects of El Niño events on
natural kelp beds and artificial reefs in southern California. ICES Journal of Marine Science 59:S330–S337.
Guenther, C. M., Lenihan, H. S., Grant, L. E., Lopez-Carr, D., and Reed, D. C. 2012. Trophic
cascades induced by lobster fishing are not ubiquitous in southern California kelp forests.
PLOS ONE 7:e49396.
Guiry, M. D. and Guiry, G. M. 2012. AlgaeBase. Worldwide Electronic Publication, National
University of Ireland, Galway. Accessed December 18, 2012. http://www.algaebase
.org.
Gutierrez, A. Correa, T., Munoz, V., Santibanez, A., Marcos, R., Caceres, C. et al. 2006.
Farming of the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera in southern Chile for development of novel
food products. Journal of Applied Phycology 18:259–267.
Haaker, P.L., Karpov, K., Rogers-Bennett, L., Taniguchi, I, Friedman, C.S., and Tegner, M.J.
2001. Abalone. Pp. 89–97. In Leet, W. S., Dewees, C. M., Klingbeil, R., and Larson,
E. J. (eds), California’s Living Marine Resources: A Status Report. California Department of
Fish and Game, Sacramento, CA.
Hairston, N. G., Smith, F. E., and Slobodkin, L. B. 1960. Community structure, population
control, and competition. American Naturalist 94:421–425.
Hales, J. M. and Fletcher, R. L. 1989. Studies on the recently introduced brown alga Sargassum muticum (Yendo) Fensholt. 4. The effect of temperature, irradiance and salinity on
germling growth. Botanica Marina 32:167–176.
Halewood, E. R., Carlson, C. A., Brzezinski, M. A., Reed, D. C., and Goodman, J. 2012.
Annual cycle of organic matter partitioning and its availability to bacteria across the
Santa Barbara Channel continental shelf. Aquatic Microbial Ecology 67:189–209.
Halpern, B. S. 2003. The impact of marine reserves: do reserves work and does reserve size
matter? Ecological Applications 13:117–137.
Halpern, B. S. and Cottenie, K. 2007. Little evidence for climate effects on local-scale
structure and dynamics of California kelp forest communities. Global Change Biology
13:236–251.
Halpern, B. S. and Warner, R. R. 2002. Marine reserves have rapid and lasting effects. Ecology Letters 5:361–366.

344

•

REFERENCES

Halpern, B. S. and Warner, R. R. 2003. Matching marine reserve design to reserve objectives. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 270:1871–1878.
Halpern, B. S., Cottenie, K., and Broitman, B. R. 2006. Strong top-down control in southern
California kelp forest ecosystems. Science 312:1230–1232.
Halpern, B. S., Lester, S. E., and Kellner, J. B. 2010. Spillover from marine reserves and the
replenishment of fished stocks. Environmental Conservation 36:268–276.
Hamilton, S. L., Caselle, J. E., Standish, J. D., Schroeder, D. M., Love, M. S., Rosales-Casian,
J. A. et al. 2007. Size-selective harvesting alters life histories of a temperate sex-changing
fish. Ecological Applications 17:2268–2280.
Hamilton, S. L., Caselle, J. E., Malone, D. P., and Carr, M. H. 2010. Incorporating biogeography into evaluations of the Channel Islands marine reserve network. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 107:18272–18277.
Hamilton, S. L., Newsome, S. D., and Caselle, J. E. 2014. Dietary niche expansion of a
kelp forest predator recovering from intense commercial exploitation. Ecology 95:
164–172.
Hamilton, S. L. and Caselle, J. E. 2015. Exploitation and recovery of a sea urchin predator has
implications for the resilience of southern California kelp forests. Proceedings of the Royal
Society B 282. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2014.1817.
Hamon, K. G., Thebaud, O., Frusher, S., and Richard-Little, L. 2009. A retrospective analysis of the effects of adopting individual transferable quotas in the Tasmanian red rock
lobster, Jasus edwardsii, fishery. Aquatic Living Resources 22:549–558.
Hansen, J. and Nazarenko, L. 2004. Soot climate forcing via snow and ice albedos. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101:423–428.
Hanski, I. 1999. Metapopulation Ecology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Harley, C. D. G., Anderson, K. M., Demes, K. W., Jorve, J. P., Kordas, R. L., Coyle, T. A. et al.
2012. Effects of climate change on global seaweed communities. Journal of Phycology
48:1064–1078.
Harper, J. L. 1977. The Population Biology of Plants. Academic Press, London, UK.
Harper, J. L. and White, J. 1974. The demography of plants. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systemetics 5:419–463.
Harrer, S. L., Reed, D. C., Holbrook, S. J., and Miller, R. J. 2013. Patterns and controls of the
dynamics of net primary production by understory macroalgal assemblages in giant kelp
forests. Journal of Phycology 49:248–257.
Harris, L. G., Ebeling, A. W., Laur, D. R., and Rowley, R. J. 1984. Community recovery after
storm damage: a case of facilitation in primary succession. Science 224:1336–1338.
Harrold, C. and Lisin, S. 1989. Radio-tracking rafts of giant kelp: local production and
regional transport. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 130:237–251.
Harrold, C. and Pearse, J. S. 1987. The ecological role of echinoderms in kelp forests.
Pp. 137–233. In Jangoux, M. and Lawrence, J. M. (eds), Echinoderm Studies. A.A. Balkema
Press, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Harrold, C. and Reed, D. C. 1985. Food availability, sea-urchin grazing and kelp forest community structure. Ecology 66:1160–1169.
Harrold, C., Watanabe, J., and Lisin, S. 1988. Spatial variation in the structure of kelp forest
communities along a wave exposure gradient. Marine Ecology 9:131–156.

REFERENCES

•

3 45

Harrold, C., Light, K., and Lisin, S. 1998. Organic enrichment of submarine-canyon and
continental-shelf benthic communities by macroalgal drift imported from nearshore kelp
forests. Limnology and Oceanography 43:669–678.
Hart, M. W. and Scheibling, R. E. 1988. Heat waves, baby booms, and the destruction of kelp
beds by sea urchins. Marine Biology 99:167–176.
Hatfield, B. and Tinker, T. 2012. Spring 2012 Mainland California Sea Otter Census Results.
USGS Western Ecological Research Center, Santa Cruz Field Station (2012-08-20). USGS.
http://www.werc.usgs.gov/ProjectSubWebPage.aspx?SubWebPageID=22&ProjectID=91.
Haxo, F. T. and Blinks, L. R. 1950. Photosynthetic action spectra of marine algae. The Journal
of General Physiology 33:389–422.
Hay, C. H. 1986. A new species of Macrocystis C. Ag. (Phaeophyta) from Marion Island,
southern Indian Ocean. Phycologia 25:241–252.
Hay, C. H. 1990. The distribution of Macrocystis (Phaeophyta: Laminariales) as a biological
indicator of cool sea surface temperature, with special reference to New Zealand waters.
Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand 20:313–336.
Hedgpeth, J. W. 1957. Marine biogeography. Pp. 359–382. In Hedgpeth, J. W. and Ladd, H. S.
(eds), Treatise of Marine Ecology and Paleoecology. Geological Society of America, Memphis, TN.
Heine, J. N. 1983. Seasonal productivity of two red algae in a central California kelp forest.
Journal of Phycology 19:146–152.
Helmuth, B., Veit, R. R., and Holberton, R. 1994. Long-distance dispersal of a sub-Antarctic
brooding bivalve (Giamardia trapesina) by kelp rafting. Marine Biology 120:421–426.
Helmuth, B., Mieszkowska, N., Moore, P., and Hawkins, S. J. 2006. Living on the edge of
two changing worlds: forecasting the responses of rocky intertidal ecosystems to climate
change. Annual Review of Ecology Evolution and Systematics 36:373–404.
Henríquez, L. A. Buschmann, A. H., Maldonado, M. A., Graham, M. H., HernandezGonzález, M. C., Pereda, S. V. et al. 2011. Grazing on giant kelp microscopic phases and
the recruitment success of annual populations of Macrocystis pyrifera (Laminariales,
Phaeophyta) in Southern Chile. Journal of Phycology 47:252–258.
Henry, E. C. and Cole, K. M. 1982a. Ultrastructure of swarmers in the Laminariales (Phaeophyceae). I. Zoospores. Journal of Phycology 18:550–569.
Henry, E. C. and Cole, K. M. 1982b. Ultrastructure of swarmers in the Laminariales (Phaeophyceae) 2. Sperm. Journal of Phycology 18:570–579.
Hepburn, C. D. and Hurd, C. L. 2005. Conditional mutualism between the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera and colonial epifauna. Marine Ecology Progress Series 302:37–48.
Hepburn, C. D., Pritchard, D. W., Cornwall, C. E., McLeod, R. J., Beardall, J., Raven, J. A.
et al. 2011. Diversity of carbon use strategies in a kelp forest community: implications for
a high CO2 ocean. Global Change Biology 17:2488–2497.
Hernández-Carmona, G., Garcia, O., Robledo, D., and Foster, M. 2000. Restoration techniques for Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyceae) populations at the southern limit of their
distribution in Mexico. Botanica Marina 43:273–284.
Hernández-Carmona, G., Robledo, D., and Serviere-Zaragoza, E. 2001. Effect of nutrient
availability on Macrocystis pyrifera recruitment and survival near its southern limit off
Baja California. Botanica Marina 44:221–229.

3 46

•

REFERENCES

Hernández-Carmona, G., Hughes, B., and Graham, M. H. 2006. Reproductive longevity
of drifting kelp Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyceae) in Monterey Bay, USA. Journal of
Phycology 42:1199–1207.
Hernández-Carmona, G., Riosmena-Rodriguez, R., Serviere-Zaragoza, E., and Ponce-Diaz,
G. 2011. Effect of nutrient availability on understory algae during El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) conditions in Central Pacific Baja California. Journal of Applied Phycology
23:635–642.
Hewitt, C. L. Campbell, M. L., McEnnulty, F., Moore, K. M., Murfet, N. B., Robertson, B. et
al. 2005. Efficacy of physical removal of a marine pest: the introduced kelp Undaria pinnatifida in a Tasmanian Marine Reserve. Biological Invasions 7:251–263.
Hilborn, R., Stokes, K., Maguire, J., Smith, T., Botsford, L. W., Mangel, M. et al. 2004. When
can marine reserves improve fisheries management? Ocean and Coastal Management
47:197–205.
Hines, A. H. 1982. Coexistence in a kelp forest: size, population dynamics and resource
partitioning in a guild of spider crabs (Brachyura, Majidae). Ecological Monographs
52:179–198.
Hines, A. H. and Loughlin, T. R. 1980. Observations of sea otters digging for clams at Monterey Bay, California. Fishery Bulletin 78:159–163.
Hines, A. H. and Pearse, J. S. 1982. Abalones, shells, and sea otters: dynamics of prey populations in central California. Ecology 63:1547–1560.
Hixon, M. A. 1980. Competitive interactions between California reef fishes of the genus
Embiotoca. Ecology 61:918–931.
Hixon, M. A. 2006. Competition. Pp. 449–465. In Allen, L. G., Pondella, D. J., and Horn,
M. H. (eds), The Ecology of Marine Fishes: California and Adjacent Waters. University of
California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Hobday, A. J. 2000a. Age of drifting Macrocystis pyrifera (L.) C. Agardh rafts in the Southern
California Bight. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 253:97–114.
Hobday, A. J. 2000b. Abundance and dispersal of drifting kelp Macrocystis pyrifera rafts in
the Southern California Bight. Marine Ecology Progress Series 195:101–116.
Hobday, A. J. 2000c. Persistence and transport of fauna on drifting kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera
(L.) C. Agardh) rafts in the Southern California Bight. Journal of Experimental Marine
Biology and Ecology 253:75–96.
Hobday, A. J., Tegner, M. J., and Haaker, P. L. 2001. Over-exploitation of a broadcast spawning marine invertebrate: decline of the white abalone. Fish Biology and Fisheries 10:
493–514.
Hockey, P. A. R. 1988. Kelp gulls Larus dominicanus as predators in kelp Macrocystis pyrifera
beds. Oecologia 76:155–157.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O. and Bruno, J. F. 2010. The impact of climate change on the world’s
marine ecosystems. Science 328:1523–1528.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Mumby, P. J., Hooten, A. J., Steneck, R. S., Greenfield, P., Gomez,
E. et al. 2007. Coral reefs under rapid climate change and ocean acidification. Science
318:1737–1742.
Hoff mann, A. and Santelices, B. 1997. Flora marina de Chile central. Universidad Catolica
de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

REFERENCES

•

3 47

Hoff mann, A. J. and Santelices, B. 1991. Banks of algal microscopic forms: hypotheses
on their functioning and comparisons with seed banks. Marine Ecology Progress Series
79:185–194.
Hofmann, G. E., Barry, J. P., Edmunds, P. J., Gates, R. D., Hutchins, D. A., Klinger, T. et
al.2010. The effect of ocean acidification on calcifying organisms in marine ecosystems:
an organism-to-ecosystem perspective. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 41:127–147.
Holbrook, S. J., Schmitt, R. J., and Ambrose, R. F. 1990. Biogenic habitat structure and characteristics of temperate reef fish assemblages. Australian Journal of Ecology 15:489–503.
Holbrook, S. J., Schmitt, R. J., and Stephens, J. S. 1997. Changes in an assemblage of temperate reef fishes associated with a climate shift. Ecological Applications 7:1299–1310.
Hooker, J. D. 1847. The Botany of the Antarctic Voyage of H.M. Discovery Ships Erebus and
Terror in the Years 1839–1843. I. Flora Antarctica, Part 2. Reeve Brothers, London, UK.
Houk, J. L. and Geibel, J. J. 1974. Observations of underwater tool use by the sea otter,
Enhydra lutris Linnaeus. California Fish and Game 60:207–208.
Howard, M. D., Sutula, M., Caron, D. A., Chao, Y., Farrara, J. D., Frenzel, H. et al. 2014.
Anthropogenic nutrient sources rival natural sources on small scales in the coastal waters
of the Southern California Bight. Limnology and Oceanography 59:285–297.
Hruby, T. 1978. Impacts of Large-Scale Aquatic Biomass Systems. Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution Technical Report, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA.
Hsieh, C. H., Kim, H. J., Watson, W., Di Lorenzo, E., and Sugihara, G. 2009. Climate-driven
changes in abundance and distribution of larvae of oceanic fishes in the southern California region. Global Change Biology 15:2137–2152.
Hughes, A. D., Brunner, L., Cook, E. J., Kelly, M. S., and Wilson, B. 2012. Echinoderms display morphological and behavioural phenotypic plasticity in response to their trophic
environment. PLOS ONE 7:e41243.
Hughes, B. B., Eby, R., Van Dye, E., Tinker, M. T., Marks, C. I., Johnson, K. S. et al. 2013.
Recovery of a top predator mediates negative eutrophic effects on seagrass. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 110:15313–15318.
Hurd, C. L. 2000. Water motion, marine macroalgal physiology and production. Journal of
Phycology 36:453–472.
Hurd, C. L. and Pilditch, C. A. 2011. Flow-induced morphological variations affect diff usion boundary-layer thickness of Macrocystis pyrifera (Heterokontophyta, Laminariales).
Journal of Phycology 47:341–351.
Hurd, C. L. and Stevens, C. L. 1997. Flow visualization around single-and multiple-bladed
seaweeds with various morphologies. Journal of Phycology 33:360–367.
Hurd, C. L., Harrison, P. J., and Druehl, L. D. 1996. Effect of seawater velocity on inorganic
nitrogen uptake by morphologically distinct forms of Macrocystis integrifolia from wavesheltered and exposed sites. Marine Biology 126:205–214.
Hurd, C. L., Stevens, C. L., Laval, B. E., Lawrence, G. A., and Harrison, P. J. 1997. Visualization of seawater flow around morphologically distinct forms of the giant kelp Macrocystis
integrifolia from wave-sheltered and exposed sites. Limnology and Oceanography
42:156–163.

348

•

REFERENCES

Hurd, C. L., Hepburn, C. D., Currie, K. I., Raven, J. A., and Hunter, K. A. 2009. Testing
the effects of ocean acidification on algal metabolism: considerations for experimental
designs. Journal of Phycology 45:1236–1251.
Hymanson, Z. P., Reed, D. C., Foster, M. S., and Carter, J. W. 1990. The validity of using
morphological-characteristics as predictors of age in the kelp Pterogophora californica
(Laminariales, Phaeophyta). Marine Ecology Progress Series 59:295–304.
Inderjit, Chapman, D., Ranelletti, M., and Kaushik, S. 2006. Invasive marine algae: an
ecological perspective. Botanical Review 72:153–178.
Inglis, G. 1989. The colonization and degradation of stranded Macrocystis pyrifera (L) C Ag.
by the macrofauna of a New Zealand sandy beach. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology
and Ecology 125:203–217.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2013. Summary for policymakers. In
Stocker, T. F., Qin, D., Plattner, G. K., Tignor, M., Allen, S. K., Boschung, J. et al. (eds),
Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK/New York.
Isaacs, J. D. 1976. Wave Climate Modification and Monitoring. Pp. 87–90. University of California Sea Grant College Program Annual Report 1975-1976, University of California,
La Jolla, CA.
Jackson, G. A. 1977. Nutrients and production of giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, off southern
California. Limnology and Oceanography 22:979–995.
Jackson, G. A. 1983. The physical and chemical environment of a kelp community. Pp. 11–37.
In Bascom, W. (ed.), The Effects of Waste Disposal on Kelp Communities. Southern California Coastal Water Research Project, Long Beach, CA.
Jackson, G. A. 1987. Modeling the growth and harvest yield of the giant kelp Macrocystis
pyrifera. Marine Biology 95:611–624.
Jackson, G. A. and Winant, C. D. 1983. Effect of a kelp forest on coastal currents. Continental
Shelf Research 20:75–80.
Jackson, J. B. C., Kirby, M. X., Berger, W. H., Bjorndal, K. A., Botsford, L. W., Bourque, B. J.
et al. 2001. Historical overfishing and the recent collapse of coastal ecosystems. Science
293:629–638.
James, D. E., Stull, J. K., and North, W. J. 1990. Toxicity of sewage-contaminated sediment
cores to Macrocystis pyrifera (Laminariales, Phaeophyta) gametophytes determined by
digital image analysis. Hydrobiologia 204:483–489.
Jangoux, M. 1984. Diseases of echinoderms. Helgolander Wissenschaftliche Meeresuntersuchungen 37:207–216.
Jenkins, S. R., Hawkins, S. J., and Norton, T. A. 2004. Long term effects of Ascophyllum nodosum canopy removal on mid-shore community structure. Journal of the Marine Biological
Association of the United Kingdom 84:327–329.
Jerlov, N. G. 1968. Optical Oceanography. Elsevier Publishing Co., New York.
Johnson, C. R., Valentine, J., Pederson, H., Heinzeller, T., and Nebelsick, J. 2003. A most
unusual barrens: complex interactions between lobsters, sea urchins and algae facilitates
spread of an exotic kelp in eastern Tasmania. Echinoderms: München 1:213–220.

REFERENCES

•

3 49

Johnson, C. R., Ling, S., Ross, D., Shepherd, S., and Miller, K. 2005. Establishment of the
Long-Spined Sea Urchin (Centrostephanus Rodgersii) in Tasmania: First Assessment of Pot
ential Threats to Fisheries. FRDC Project No. 2001/044. Tasmanian Aquaculture and
Fisheries Institute. Fisheries Research and Development Corporation, Australian
Government.
Johnson, C. R., Banks, S. C., Barrett, N. S., Cazassus, F., Dunstan, P. K., Edgar, G. J. et al.
2011. Climate change cascades: shifts in oceanography, species’ ranges and subtidal
marine community dynamics in eastern Tasmania. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 400:17–32.
Johnson, D. L. 1980. Episodic vegetation stripping, soil erosion, and landscape modification
in prehistoric and recent historic time, San Miguel Island, California. Pp. 103–121. In
Power, D. M. (ed.), The California Islands: Proceedings of a Multidisciplinary Symposium.
Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History, Santa Barbara, CA.
Jones, G. M. and Scheibling, R. E. 1985. Paramoeba sp (Amebida, Paramoebidae) as the possible casusative agent of sea-urchin mass mortality in Nova Scotia. Journal of Parasitology
71:559–565.
Jones, G. P. 1988. Ecology of rocky reef fish of north-eastern New Zealand: a review. New
Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research 22:445–462.
Jones, H. P. and Schmitz, O. J. 2009. Rapid recovery of damaged ecosystems. PLOS ONE
4:e5653.
Jones, L. G. 1971. Studies of selected small herbivorous invertebrates inhabiting Macrocystis
canopies and holdfasts in southern California kelp beds. Pp. 343–367. In North, W. J.
(ed.), The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag
Von J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Jones, N. S. and Kain, J. M. 1967. Subtidal algal colonization following removal of Echinus.
Helgolander Wissenschaftliche Meeresuntersuchungen 15:460–466.
Kain, J. M. 1979. A view of the genus Laminaria. Oceanography and Marine Biology: An
Annual Review 17:101–161.
Kamenos, N. A., Burdett, H. L., Aloisio, E., Findlay, H. S., Martin, S., Longbone, C. et al.
2013. Coralline algal structure is more sensitive to rate, rather than the magnitude, of
ocean acidification. Global Change Biology 19:3621–3628.
Karpov, K., Haaker, P., Taniguchi, I., and Rogers-Bennett, L. 2000. Serial depletion and the
collapse of the California abalone (Haliotis spp.) fishery. Pp. 11–24. In Campbell, A. (ed.).
Workshop on Rebuilding Abalone Stocks in British Columbia. Canadian Special Publication
of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences. NRC Research Press, Ottawa, Canada.
Kastendiek, J. E. 1982. Competitor mediated coexistence: interactions among three species
of benthic macroalgae. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 62:201–210.
Kato, S. 1972. Sea urchins: new fishery develops in California. Marine Fisheries Review
34:23–30.
Kay, M. C., Lenihan, H. S., Guenther, C. M., Wilson, J. R., Miller, C. J., and Shrout, S. W. 2012.
Collaborative assessment of California spiny lobster population and fishery responses to
a marine reserve network. Ecological Applications 22:322–335.
Keats, D. 1986. Comment on ‘Seaweeds, sea urchins, and lobsters: a reappraisal’ by RJ
Miller. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 43:1675–1676.

350

•

REFERENCES

Kelsey, H. 1986. Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo. Huntington Library, San Marino, CA.
Kennelly, S. J. and Underwood, A. J. 1984. Underwater microscopic sampling of a sublittoral
kelp community. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 76:67–78.
Kenner, M. C. 1992. Population dynamics of the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus in
a central California kelp forest: recruitment, mortality, growth and diet. Marine Biology
112:107–118.
Kenyon, K. W. 1969. The sea otter in the eastern Pacific Ocean. North American Fauna
68:1–252.
Kim, S. L. 1992. The role of drift kelp in the population ecology of a Diopatra ornata Moore
(Polychaeta, Onuphidae) ecotone. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology
156:253–272.
Kim, Y. S. and Nam, K. W. 1997. Maturation of gametophytes of Undaria pinnatifida (Harvey)
Suringar in Korea. Journal of the Korean Fisheries Society 30:505–510.
Kimura, R. S. and Foster, M. S. 1984. The effects of harvesting Macrocystis pyrifera on the
algal assemblage in a giant kelp forest. Hydrobiologia 116–117:425–428.
Kingsford, M. J. 1995. Drift algae: a contribution to near-shore habitat complexity in
the pelagic environment and an attractant for fish. Marine Ecology Progress Series
116:297–301.
Kingsford, M. J. and Choat, J. H. 1985. The fauna associated with drift algae captured with a
plankton-mesh purse seine net. Limnology and Oceanography 30:618–630.
Kingsford, M. J., Schiel, D. R., and Battershill, C. N. 1989. Distribution and abundance of
fish in a rocky reef environment at the sub-Antarctic Auckland Islands, New Zealand.
Polar Biology 9:179–186.
Kinlan, B. P. and Gaines, S. D. 2003. Propagule dispersal in marine and terrestrial environments: a community perspective. Ecology 84:2007–2020.
Kinlan, B. P., Graham, M. H., Sala, E., and Dayton, P. K. 2003. Arrested development of
giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera, Phaeophyceae) embryonic sporophytes: a mechanism for
delayed recruitment in perennial kelps? Journal of Phycology 39:47–57.
Kinlan, B. P., Gaines, S. D., and Lester, S. E. 2005. Propagule dispersal and the scales of
marine community process. Diversity and Distributions 11:139–148.
Kirtman, B., Power, S. B., Adedoyin, J. A., Boer, G. J., Bojariu, R., Camilloni, I., et al. 2013.
Near-term climate change: projections and predictability. In Stocker, T. F., Qin, D.,
Plattner, G. K., Tignor, M., Allen, S. K., Boschung, J., et al. (eds), The Physical Science
Basis: Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New
York.
Kitching, J. A. and Ebling, F. J. 1961. The ecology of Lough XI. The control of algae by Paracentrotus lividus (Echinoidea). Journal of Animal Ecology 30:373–383.
Kitching, J. A., Mccan, T. T., and Hilson, H. C. 1934. Studies in sublittoral ecology. I. A submarine gully in Wembury Bay, South Devon. Journal of the Marine Biological Association
of the United Kingdom 19:677–705.
Klein, C. J. Chan, A., Cundiff, L., Gardner, A. J., Hrovat, Y., Scholz, A., et al. 2008. Striking
a balance between biodiversity conservation and socioeconomic viability in the design of
marine protected areas. Conservation Biology 22:691–700.

REFERENCES

•

351

Koehl, M. A. R. 1984. How do benthic organisms withstand moving water. American Zoologist 24:57–70.
Koehl, M. A. R. 1986. Mechanical design of spicule-reinforced connective tissues. American
Zoologist 26:A38.
Koehl, M. A. R. 1999. Ecological biomechanics of benthic organisms: life history mechanical design and temporal patterns of mechanical stress. Journal of Experimental Biology
202:3469–3476.
Koehl, M. A. R. and Wainwright, S. A. 1977. Mechanical adaptations of a giant kelp. Limnology and Oceanography 22:1067–1071.
Koehl, M. A. R., Silk, W. K., Liang, H., and Mahadevan, L. 2008. How kelp produce blade
shapes suited to different flow regimes: a new wrinkle. Integrative and Comparative Biology 48:834–851.
Konar, B. 2000. Seasonal inhibitory effects of marine plants on sea urchins: structuring
communities the algal way. Oecologia 125:208–217.
Konar, B. and Foster, M. S. 1992. Distribution and recruitment of subtidal geniculate coralline algae. Journal of Phycology 28:273–280.
Konar, B. and Roberts, C. 1996. Large-scale landslide effects on two exposed rocky subtidal
areas in California. Botanica Marina 39:517–524.
Konar, B., Edwards, M. S., and Estes, J. A. 2014. Biological interactions maintain the boundaries between kelp forests and urchin barrens in the Aleutian Archipelago. Hydrobiologia
724:91–107.
Konotchick, T., Parnell, P. E., Dayton, P. K., and Leichter, J. J. 2012. Vertical distribution of
Macrocystis pyrifera nutrient exposure in southern California. Estuarine Coastal and Shelf
Science 106:85–92.
Konotchick, T., Dupont, C. L., Valas, R. E., Badger, J. H., and Allen, A. E. 2013. Transcriptomic analysis of metabolic function in the giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, across depth
and season. New Phytologist 198:398–407.
Kopczak, C. D. 1994. Variability of nitrate uptake capacity in Macrocystis pyrifera
(Laminariales, Phaeophyta) with nitrate and light availability. Journal of Phycology
30:573–580.
Kopczak, C. D., Zimmerman, R. C., and Kremer, J. N. 1991. Variation in nitrogen physiology and growth among geographically isolated populations of the giant kelp, Macrocystis
pyrifera (Phaeophyta). Journal of Phycology 27:149–158.
Korb, R. E. and Gerard, V. A. 2000. Nitrogen assimilation characteristics of polar seaweeds
from differing nutrient environments. Marine Ecology Progress Series 198:83–92.
Kovalenko, I., Zdyrko, B., Magasinski, A., Hertzberg, B., Milicev, Z., Burtovyy, R. et al. 2011.
A major constituent of brown algae for use in high-capacity Li-Ion batteries. Science
334:75–79.
Kramer, D. E. and Nordin, D. M. A. 1979. Studies on the Handling and Processing of Sea Urchin
Roe. I. Fresh Product. Fisheries and Marine Service Technical Report No. 870, Department of Fisheries and Oceans, BC, Canada.
Kroeker, K. J., Kordas, R. L., Crim, R. N., and Singh, G. G. 2010. Meta-analysis reveals
negative yet variable effects of ocean acidification on marine organisms. Ecology Letters
13:1419–1434.

352

•

REFERENCES

Kroeker, K. J., Kordas, R. L., Crim, R., Hendriks, I. E., Ramajo, L., Singh, G. S. et al. 2013.
Impacts of ocean acidification on marine organisms: quantifying sensitivities and interaction with warming. Global Change Biology 19:1884–1896.
Krumhansl, K. A. and Scheibling, R. E. 2012. Production and fate of kelp detritus. Marine
Ecology Progress Series 467:281–302.
Kühnemann, O. 1970. Algunas considerationes sobre los bosques de Macrocystis pyrifera.
Physis 29:273–296. (in Spanish)
Küpper, F. C., Carpenter, L. J., McFiggans, G. B., Palmer, C. J., Waite, T. J., Boneberg, E.-M.
et al. 2008. Iodide accumulation provides kelp with an inorganic antioxidant impacting
atmospheric chemistry. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105:6954–6958.
Kuwabara, J. S. 1982. Micronutrients and kelp cultures: evidence for cobalt and manganese
deficiency in southernCalifornia deep seawater. Science 216:1219–1221.
Kuwabara, J. S. and North, W. J. 1980. Culturing microscopic stages of Macrocystis pyrifera
(Phaeophyta) in Aquil, a chemically defined medium. Journal of Phycology 16:546–549.
Ladah, L. B. and Zertuche-González, J. A. 2004. Giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) survival in
deep water (25–40 m) during El Niño of 1997–1998 in Baja California, Mexico. Botanica
Marina 47:367–372.
Ladah, L. B. and Zertuche-González, J. A. 2007. Survival of microscopic stages of a perennial kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) from the center and the southern extreme of its range in
the Northern Hemisphere after exposure to simulated El Niño stress. Marine Biology
152:677–686.
Ladah, L. B., Zertuche-González, J. A., and Hernández-Carmona, G. 1999. Giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera, Phaeophyceae) recruitment near its southern limit in Baja California
after mass disappearance during ENSO 1997-1998. Journal of Phycology 35:1106–1112.
Lafferty, K. D. 2004. Fishing for lobsters indirectly increases epidemics in sea urchins. Ecological Applications 14:1566–1573.
Lafferty, K. D. and Kuris, A. M. 1993. Mass mortality of abalone Haliotis cracherodii on California Channel Islands: tests of epidemiologic hypotheses. Marine Ecology Progress Series
96:239–248.
Lane, C. E., Mayes, C., Druehl, L. D., and Saunders, G. W. 2006. A multi-gene molecular
investigation of the kelp (Laminariales, Phaeophyceae) supports substantial taxonomic
re-organization. Journal of Phycology 42:493–512.
Langford, T. 1990. Ecological Effects of Thermal Discharges. Elsevier, Essex, UK.
Larivière, S. 1998. Lontra felina. Mammalian Species 575:1–5.
Larson, R. J. 1980. Competition, habitat selection and the bathymetric segregation of two
rockfish (Sebastes) species. Ecological Monographs 50:221–239.
Larson, R. J. and DeMartini, E. E. 1984. Abundance and vertical distribution of fishes in a
cobble-bottom kelp forest off San Onofre, California. Fishery Bulletin 82:37–53.
Lastra, M., Page, H. M., Dugan, J. E., Hubbard, D. M., and Rodil, I. F. 2008. Processing of
allochthonous macrophyte subsidies by sandy beach consumers: estimates of feeding
rates and impacts on food resources. Marine Biology 154:163–174.
Lauck, T., Clark, C. W., Mangel, M., and Munro, G. R. 1998. Implementing the precautionary principle in fisheries management through marine reserves. Ecological Applications
8:72–78.

REFERENCES

•

353

Laur, D., Ebeling, A., and Coon, D. 1988. Effects of sea otter foraging on subtidal reef communities off central California. Pp. 151–168 . In VanBlaricom, G. and Estes, J. A. (eds), The
Community Ecology of Sea Otters. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
Lauzon-Guay, J. S. and Scheibling, R. E. 2007a. Behaviour of sea urchin Strongylocentrotus
droebachiensis grazing fronts: food-mediated aggregation and density-dependent facilitation. Marine Ecology Progress Series 329:191–204.
Lauzon-Guay, J. S. and Scheibling, R. E. 2007b. Seasonal variation in movement, aggregation and destructive grazing of the green sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis) in
relation to wave action and sea temperature. Marine Biology 151:2109–2118.
Lavoie, D. 1985. Population dynamics and ecology of beach wrack macroinvertebrates of the
central California coast. Bulletin of the Southern California Academy of Sciences 84:1–22.
Lawrence, J. M. 1975. On the relationship between marine plants and sea urchins. Oceanography and Marine Biology: An Annual Review 13:213–286.
Lawton, J. H. 1994. What do species do in ecosystems. Oikos 71:367–374.
Lawton, J. H. 1999. Are there general laws in ecology? Oikos 84:177–192.
Leal, P. P., Hurd, C. L., and Roleda, M. Y. 2014. Meiospores produced in sori of nonsporophyllous laminae of Macrocystis pyrifera (Laminariales, Phaeophyceae) may enhance reproductive output. Journal of Phycology 50:400–405.
Leet, W. S., Dewees, C. M., Klingbeil, R., and Larson, E. J. 2001. California’s Living Marine
Resources: A Status Report. California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, CA.
Leighton, D. L. 1971. Grazing activities of benthic invertebrates in southern California kelp
beds. Pp. 421–453. In North, W. J. (ed.), The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in
California. Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag Von J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Leleu, K., Remy-Zephyr, B., Grace, R., and Costello, M. J. 2012. Mapping habitats in a marine
reserve showed how a 30 year trophic cascade altered ecosystem structure. Biological
Conservation 155:193–201.
Leonard, G. H. 1994. Effect of the bat star Asterina miniata (Brandt) on recruitment of the
giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera C. Agardh. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and
Ecology 179:81–98.
Lester, S. A., Halpern, B. S., Grorud-Colvert, K., Lubchenco, J., Ruttenberg, B. I., Gaines, S. D.
et al. 2009. Biological effects within no-take marine reserves: a global synthesis. Marine
Ecology Progress Series 384:33–46.
Levenbach, S. 2009. Grazing intensity influences the strength of an associational refuge on
temperate reefs. Oecologia 159:181–190.
Levin, S. A. and Paine, R. T. 1974. Disturbance, patch formation, and community structure.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 71:2744–2747.
Levins, R. 1969. Some demographic and genetic consequences of environmental heterogeneity for biological control. Bulletin for the Entomological Society of America 15:237–240.
Levyns, M. 1933. Sexual reproduction in Macrocystis pyrifera Ag. Annals of Botany 47:349–353.
Lewbel, G. S., Wolfson, A., Gerrodette, T., Lippincott, W. H., Wilson, J. L., and Littler, M. M.
1981. Shallow-water benthic communities on California’s outer continental shelf. Marine
Ecology Progress Series 4:159–168.
Lewis, R. D. and McKee, K. K. 1989. A Guide to the Artifi cial Reefs of Southern California.
California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, CA.

35 4

•

REFERENCES

Lewis, R. J. and Neushul, M. 1994. Northern and southern hemisphere hybrids of Macrocystis (Phaeophyceae). Journal of Phycology 30:346–353.
Li, D. 2011. Five trillion basidiospores in a fruiting body of Calvatia gigantea. Mycosphere
2:457–462.
Limbaugh, C. 1955. Fish Life in the Kelp Beds and the Effects of Kelp Harvesting. Institute of
Marine Resources, University of California, La Jolla, CA.
Lindberg, D. R. 1991. Marine biotic interchange between the northern and southern hemispheres. Paleobiology 17:308–324.
Ling, S. D. 2008. Range expansion of a habitat-modifying species leads to loss of taxonomic
diversity: a new and impoverished reef state. Oecologia 156:883–894.
Ling, S. D., Johnson, C. R., Frusher, S. D., and Ridgway, K. R. 2009. Overfishing reduces
resilience of kelp beds to climate-driven catastrophic phase shift. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 106:22341–22345.
Ling, S. D., Ibbott, S., and Sanderson, J. C. 2010. Recovery of canopy-forming macroalgae following removal of the enigmatic grazing sea urchin Heliocidaris erythrogramma. Journal
of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 395:135–146.
Lissner, A. L. and Dorsey, J. H. 1986. Deep-water biological assemblages of a hard-bottom
bank-ridge complex of the southern California continental borderland. Bulletin of the
Southern California Academy of Sciences 85:87–101.
Living Color. 2012. Artificial grass, kelp, algae. www.livingcolor.com.
Lobban, C. S. 1978. Growth and death of the Macrocystis sporophyte (Phaeophyceae, Laminariales). Phycologia 17:196–212.
Lotze, H. K., Erlandson, J. M., Hardt, M. J., Norris, R. D., Roy, K., Smith, T. D. et al. 2011.
Uncovering the ocean’s past. Pp. 137–162. In Jackson, J. B. C., Alexander, K. E., and Sala, E.
(eds), Shifting Baselines: The Past and the Future of Ocean Fisheries. Island Press, Washington, DC.
Lowry, L. F. and Pearse, J. S. 1973. Abalones and sea urchins in an area inhabitated by sea
otters. Marine Biology 23:213–219.
Lubchenco, J., Palumbi, S. R., Gaines, S. D., and Andelman, S. 2003. Plugging a hole in the
ocean: the emerging science of marine reserves. Ecological Applications 13(1):3–7.
Lucas, A. J., Dupont, C. L., Tai, V., Largier, J. L., Palenik, B., and Franks, P. J. S. 2011. The
green ribbon: multiscale physical control of phytoplankton productivity and community
structure over a narrow continental shelf. Limnology and Oceanography 56:611–626.
Lüning, K. 1980. Critical levels of light and temperature regulating the gametogenesis of 3
Laminaria species (Phaeophyceae). Journal of Phycology 16:1–15.
Lüning, K. 1981. Photobiology of seaweeds: ecophysiological aspects. Proceedings of the International Seaweed Symposium 10:35–55.
Lüning, K. 1993. Environmental and internal control of seasaonal growth in seaweeds.
Hydrobiologia 260–261:1–14.
Lüning, K. and Dring, M. J. 1975. Reproduction, growth and photosynthesis of gametophytes
of Laminaria saccharina grown in blue and red-light. Marine Biology 29:195–200.
Lüning, K. and Müller, D. G. 1978. Chemical interaction in sexual reproduction of several
Laminariales: release and attraction of spermatozoids. Zeitschrift fur Pflanzenphysiologie
89:333–341.

REFERENCES

•

3 55

Lüning, K. and Neushul, M. 1978. Light and temperature demands for growth ad reproduction of Laminarian gametophytes in southern and central California. Marine Biology
45:297–309.
Lüning, K. and Dieck, T. I. 1990. Distribution and evolution of the Laminariales; North
Pacific-Atlantic relationships. Pp. 187–204. In Evolutionary Biogeography of the Marine
Algae of the North Atlantic. Springer Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
Macaya, E. C. and Zuccarello, G. C. 2010a. DNA barcoding and genetic divergence in the
giant kelp Macrocystis (Laminariales). Journal of Phycology 46:736–742.
Macaya, E. C. and Zuccarello, G. C. 2010b. Genetic structure of the giant kelp Macrocystis
pyrifera along the southeastern Pacific. Marine Ecology Progress Series 420:103–112.
Macaya, E. C., Boltana, S., Hinojosa, I. A., Macchiavello, J. E., Valdivia, N. A., Vasquez, N. R.
et al. 2005. Presence of sporophylls in floating kelp rafts of Macrocystis spp. (Phaeophyceae) along the Chilean Pacific coast. Journal of Phycology 41:913–922.
Mackie, J. A., Darling, J. A., and Geller, J. B. 2012. Ecology of Cryptic Invasions: Latitudinal
Segregation among Watersipora (Bryozoa) Species. Scientific Reports 2. 871; doi:1038
/srep00871.
Madariaga, D. J., Ortiz, M., and Thiel, M. 2013. Demography and feeding behavior of the kelp
crab Taliepus marginatus in subtidal habitats dominated by the kelps Macrocystis pyrifera
or Lessonia trabeculata. Invertebrate Biology 132:133–144.
Maestre, A. and Pitt, R. 2005. The National Stormwater Quality Database, Version 1.1: A
Compilation and Analysis of Npdes Stormwater Monitoring Information. United States Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC.
Maloney, E., Fairey, R., Lyman, A., Walton, Z., and Sigala, M. 2007. Introduced Aquatic Species in California’s Open Coastal Waters 2007: Final Report. California Department of Fish
and Game, Sacramento, CA.
Malthus, T. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population. London, England. 126 pp.
Manley, S. L. 1983. Composition of sieve tube sap from Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyta)
with emphasis on the inorganic constituents Journal of Phycology 19:118–121.
Manley, S. L. and Lowe, C. G. 2012. Canopy-forming kelps as California’s coastal dosimeter:
I-131 from damaged Japanese reactor measured in Macrocystis pyrifera. Environmental
Science and Technology 46:3731–3736.
Manley, S. L. and North, W. J. 1984. Phosphorus and the growth of juvenile Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyta) sporophytes. Journal of Phycology 20:389–393.
Mann, K. H. and Breen, P. A. 1972. Relation between lobster abundance, sea urchins and
kelp beds. Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada 29:603–605.
Mansilla, A. and Ávila, M. 2011. Using Macrocystis pyrifera (L.) C. Agardh from southern
Chile as a source of applied biological compounds. Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia
21:262–267.
Marsden, I. D. 1991. Kelp-sandhopper interactions on a sand beach in New Zealand. I. drift
composition and distribution. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 152:61–74.
Martin, K. 2008. Beach grooming. Coastal Services 11:5–9.
Martínez, E. A., Cardenas, L., and Pinto, R. 2003. Recovery and genetic diversity of the
intertidal kelp Lessonia nigrescens (Phaeophyceae) 20 years after El Niño 1982/83. Journal
of Phycology 39:504–508.

356

•

REFERENCES

Mason, J. E. 2004. Historical patterns from 74 years of commercial landings from California
waters. CalCOFI Reports, 45:180–190.
Mattison, J. E., Trent, J. D., Shanks, A. L., Akin, T. B., and Pearse, J. S. 1977. Movement and
feeding activity of red sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus franciscanus) adjacent to a kelp forest. Marine Biology 39:25–30.
Maxwell, S. M., Hazen, E. L., Bograd, S. J., Halpern, B. S., Breed, G. A., Nickel, B. et al. 2013.
Cumulative human impacts on marine predators. Nature Communications 4:2688.
MBC (MBC Applied Environmental Sciences). 2013. Status of the Kelp Beds 2012: Ventura,
Los Angeles, Orange and San Diego Counties. MBC Applied Environmental Sciences, Costa
Mesa, CA.
McClanahan, T. R. and Mangi, S. 2000. Spillover of exploitable fishes from a marine park
and its effect on the adjacent fishery. Ecological Applications 10:1792–1805.
McClanahan, T. R., Baird, A. H., Marshall, P. A., and Toscano, M. A. 2004. Comparing
bleaching and mortality responses of hard corals between southern Kenya and the Great
Barrier Reef, Australia. Marine Pollution Bulletin 48:327–335.
McConnico, L. A. and Foster, M. S. 2005. Population biology of the intertidal kelp, Alaria
marginata Postels and Ruprecht: a non-fugitive annual. Journal of Experimental Marine
Biology and Ecology 324:61–75.
McFarland, W. N. and Prescott, J. 1959. Standing crop, chlorophyll content and in situ metabolism of a giant kelp community in southern California. Publication of the Institute of
Marine Science University Texas 6:109–132.
McHugh, D. J. 2003. A Guide to the Seaweed Industry. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper No.
441. FAO, Rome, Italy.
McLachlan, A. and Brown, A. C. 2006. The Ecology of Sandy Shores. Academic Press, Burlington, MA.
McLean, J. H. 1962. Sublittoral ecology of kelp beds of open coast area near Carmel, California. Biological Bulletin 122:95–114.
McNair, J. N., Newbold, J. D., and Hart, D. D. 1997. Turbulent transport of suspended particles and dispersing benthic organisms: how long to hit bottom? Journal of Theoretical
Biology 188:29–52.
McPeak, R. H. and Glantz, D. A. 1984. Harvesting California’s kelp forests. Oceanus 27:19–26.
McPeak, R. H., Glantz, D. A., and Shaw, C. R. 1988. The Amber Forest. Watersport Publishing,
San Diego, CA.
McPhee-Shaw, E. E., Siegel, D. A., Washburn, L., Brzezinski, M. A., Jones, J. L., Leydecker,
A. et al. 2007. Mechanisms for nutrient delivery to the inner shelf: observations from the
Santa Barbara Channel. Limnology and Oceanography 52:1748–1766.
Medlin, L. K., Kooistra, W., Potter, D., Saunders, G. W., and Andersen, R. A. 1997. Phylogenetic relationships of the ‘golden algae’ (haptophytes, heterokont chromophytes) and their
plastids. Plant Systematics and Evolution, 187–219.
Menge, B. A. 1992. Community regulation: under what conditions are bottom-up factors
important on rocky shores. Ecology 73:755–765.
Menge, B. A. 2008. Marine food webs: conceptual development of a central research paradigm. Pp. 3–28. In McClanahan, T. R. and Branch, G. M. (eds), Food Webs and the Dynamics of Marine Reefs. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

REFERENCES

•

357

Micheli, F. and Halpern, B. S. 2005. Low functional redundancy in coastal marine assemblages. Ecology Letters 8:391–400.
Micheli, F., Dunbar, B., Watanabe, J., Shelton, A. O., Bushinsky, S. M., Chin, A. L. et al. 2008.
Persistence of depleted abalones in marine reserves of central California. Biological Conservation 141:1078–1090.
Michelou, V. K., Caporaso, J. G., Knight, R., and Palumbi, S. R. 2013. The ecology of microbial
communities associated with Macrocystis pyrifera. PLOS ONE 8:e67480.
Miller, D. J. and Giebel, J. J. 1973. Summary of Blue Rockfish and Lingcod Life Histories; A
Reef Ecology Study; and Giant Kelp, Macrocystis Pyrifera, Experiments in Monterey Bay,
California. Fisheries Bulletin 158, California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento,
CA, 1–137.
Miller, K. A. and Engle, J. M. 2009. The natural history of Undaria pinnatifida and Sargassum
filicinum at the California Channel Islands: non-native seaweeds with different invasion
styles. Pp. 131–140. In Diamiani, C. C. and Garcelon, D. K. (eds), Proceedings of the 7th
California Islands Symposium. Institute for Wildlife Studies, Arcata, CA.
Miller, K. A., Aguilar-Rosas, L. E., and Pedroche, F. F. 2011. A review of non-native seaweeds
from California, USA and Baja California, México. Hidrobiológica 21:365–379.
Miller, R. J. 1985. Seaweeds, sea urchins and lobsters: a reappraisal. Canadian Journal of
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 42:2061–2072.
Miller, R. J. 1986. Reply to comment by D. Keats. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences 43:1676.
Miller, R. J. 1987. Reply to comment by P.A. Breen. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences 44:1807–1809.
Miller, R. J. and Colodey, A. G. 1983. Widespread mass mortalities of the green sea urchin in
Nova Scotia, Canada. Marine Biology 73:263–267.
Miller, R. J. and Etter, R. J. 2008. Shading facilitates sessile invertebrate dominance in the
rocky subtidal Gulf of Maine. Ecology 89:452–462.
Miller, R. J. and Page, H. M. 2012. Kelp as a trophic resource for marine suspension feeders:
a review of isotope-based evidence. Marine Biology 159:1391–1402.
Miller, R. J., Reed, D. C., and Brzezinski, M. A. 2011. Partitioning of primary production
among giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera), understory macroalgae, and phytoplankton on a
temperate reef. Limnology and Oceanography 56:119–132.
Mitchell, C. T. and Hunter, J. R. 1970. Fishes associated with drifting kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, off the coast of southern California and northern Baja California. California Fish
and Game 56:288–297.
Moitoza, D. J. and Phillips, D. W. 1979. Prey defense, predator preference and non-random
diet: the interactions between Pycnopodia helianthoides and two species of sea urchins.
Marine Biology 53:299–304.
Mooney, H., Larigauderie, A., Cesario, M., Elmquist, T., Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Lavorel, S.
et al. 2009. Biodiversity, climate change, and ecosystem services. Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability 1:46–54.
Moore, L. B. 1943. Observations on the growth of Macrocystis in New Zealand with a description of a free-living form. Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New Zealand
72:333–341.

358

•

REFERENCES

Mora, C. and Sale, P. F. 2011. Ongoing global biodiversity loss and the need to move beyond
protected areas: a review of the technical and practical shortcomings of protected areas
on land and sea. Marine Ecology Progress Series 434:251–266.
Morelissen, B., Dudley, B. D., Geange, S. W., and Phillips, N. E. 2013. Gametophyte reproduction and development of Undaria pinnatifi da under varied nutrient and irradiance
conditions. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 448:197–206.
Moreno, C. A. and Jara, H. F. 1984. Ecological studies on fish fauna associated with Macrocystis pyrifera belts in the south of Fueguian Islands, Chile. Marine Ecology Progress Series
15:99–107.
Moreno, C. A. and Sutherland, J. P. 1982. Physical and biological processes in a Macrocystis
pyrifera community near Valdivia, Chile. Oecologia 55:1–6.
Moritz, C. and Agudo, R. 2013. The future of species under climate change: resilience or
decline? Science 341:504–508.
Morris, R. H., Abbott, D. P., and Haderlie, E. C. 1980. Intertidal Invertebrates of California.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
Morse, D. E., Hooker, N., Duncan, H., and Jensen, L. 1979. Gamma-aminobutyric acid, a
neurotransmitter, induces planktonic abalone larvae to settle and begin metamorphosis.
Science 204:407–410.
Müller, D. G. 1981. Sexuality and sexual attraction. Pp. 661–676. In Lobban, C. S. and
Wynne, M. J. (eds), The Biology of Seaweeds. Botanical Monographs 17. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Müller, D. G. 1988. Demonstration of sexual pheromones in Laminariales and Desmarestiales. Pp. 243–250. In Lobban, C. S., Chapman, D. J., and Cremer, B. (eds), Experimental
Phycology: A Laboratory Manual. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Müller, D. G., Maier, I., and Gassmann, G. 1985. Survey on sexual pheromone specificity in
Laminariales (Phaeophyceae). Phycologia 24:475–477.
Muñoz, V., Hernández-González, M. C., Buschmann, A. H., Graham, M. H., and Vásquez, J. A.
2004. Variability in per capita oogonia and sporophyte production from giant kelp gametophytes (Macrocystis pyrifera, Phaeophyceae). Revista Chilena De Historia Natural 77:639–647.
Murdoch, W. W., Mechalas, B., and Fay, R. C. 1989. Final Report of the Marine Review Committee to the California Coastal Commission on the Effects of the San Onofre Nuclear Generating
Station on the Marine Environment. California Coastal Commission, San Francisco, CA.
Murray, S. N., Littler, M. M., and Abbott, I. A. 1980. Biogeography of the California marine
algae with emphasis on the southern California islands. Pp. 325–339. In Power, D. M.
(ed.), The California Islands: Proceedings of a Multidisciplinary Symposium. Santa Barbara
Museum of Natural History, Santa Barbara, CA.
Murray, S. N., Ambrose, R. F., Bohnsack, J. A., Botsford, L. W., Carr, M. H., Davis, G. E. et al.
1999. No-take reserve networks: sustaining fishery populations and marine ecosystems.
Fisheries 24:11–25.
Muth, A. F. 2012. Effects of zoospore aggregation and substrate rugosity on kelp recruitment
success. Journal of Phycology 48:1374–1379.
NASA JPL (National Aeronautics and Space Administration Jet Propulsion Laboratory). 2013.
MODIS Aqua Level 3 SST thermal IR monthly 4km nighttime. http://podaac.jpl.nasa.gov
/dataset/MODIS_AQUA_L3_SST_THERMAL_MONTHLY_4KM_NIGHTTIME.

REFERENCES

•

3 59

Neuman, M., Tissot, B., and VanBlaricom, G. 2010. Overall status and threats assessment
of black abalone (Haliotis cracherodii Leach, 1814) populations in California. Journal of
Shellfish Research 29:577–586.
Neushul, M. 1959. Studies on the Growth and Reproduction of the Giant Kelp, Macrocystis. PhD
thesis. University of California, Los Angeles.
Neushul, M. 1963. Studies on giant kelp, Macrocystis. 2. Reproduction. American Journal of
Botany 50:354–359.
Neushul, M. 1965. Scuba diving studies of the vertical distribution of benthic marine plants.
Botanica Gothoburgensia 3:161–176
Neushul, M. 1971a. The species of Macrocystis with particular reference to those of North
and South America. Pp. 211–222. In North, W. J. (ed.), The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds
(Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag Von. J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Neushul, M. 1971b. Submarine illumination in Macrocystis. Pp. 241–254. In North, W. J.
(ed.), The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag
Von J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Neushul, M. 1972. Functional interpretation of benthic marine algal morphology. Pp. 47–74.
In Abbott, I. A. and Kurogi, M. (eds), Contributions to the Systematics of Benthic Marine
Algae of the North Pacific. Japanese Society of Phycology, Kobe, Japan.
Neushul, M. 1987. Energy from marine biomass: a historical record. Pp. 1–37. In Bird, T. K.
and Benson, P. H. (eds), Seaweed Cultivation for Renewable Resources. Elsevier Science
Publishers, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Neushul, M. and Harger, B. W. G. 1985. Studies of biomass yield from a nearshore macroalgal test farm. Journal of Solar Energy Engineering 107:93–97.
Neushul, M. and Haxo, F. T. 1963. Studies on giant kelp, Macrocystis. 1. Growth of young
plants. American Journal of Botany 50:349–353.
Neushul, M., Clarke, W. D., and Brown, D. W. 1967. Subtidal plant and animal communities
of the southern California islands. Pp. 37–55. In Philbrick, R. (ed.), Proceedings of the
Symposium on the Biology of the California Islands. Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, Santa
Barbara, CA.
Neushul, M., Foster, M. S., Coon, D. A., Woessner, J. W., and Harger, B. W. W. 1976. In situ
study of recruitment, growth and survival of subtidal marine algae: techniques and preliminary results. Journal of Phycology 12:397–408.
Neushul, P. 1989. Seaweed for war: California’s World War I kelp industry. Technology and
Culture 30:561–583.
Newcombe, E. M., Cardenas, C. A., and Geange, S. W. 2012. Green sea urchins structure
invertebrate and macroalgal communities in the Magellan Strait, southern Chile. Aquatic
Biology 15:135–144.
Nicholson, N. L. 1979. Evolution within Macrocystis: northern and southern hemisphere
taxa. Pp. 433–442. In Proceedings of the International Symposium for Marine Biogeography and Evolution in the Southern Hemisphere. NZ Department of Science and Industrial
Research, Auckland, New Zealand.
Nisbet, R. M. and Bence, J. R. 1989. Alternative dynamic regimes in canopy-forming kelp: a
variant on density-vague population regulation. American Naturalist 134:377–408.
NOAA 2012. Restoring kelp on Palos Verdes Shelf. www.montroserestoration.gov.

360

•

REFERENCES

North, W. J. 1964. An Investigation of the Effects of Discharged Wastes on Kelp. The Resources
Agency of California, State Water Quality Control Board, Sacramento, CA.
North, W. J. 1966. Kelp habitat improvement project: annual report 1965-1966. W.M. Keck
Laboratory of Environmental Health Engineering, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA.
North, W. J. 1969. Kelp Habitat Improvement Project, Annual Report 1968-1969. W.M. Keck
Laboratory of Environmental Health Engineering, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA.
North, W. J. 1971a. The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia
32. Verlag Von J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
North, W. J. 1971b. Introduction and background. Pp. 1–97. In North, W. J. (ed.), The Biology
of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag Von J. Cramer,
Lehre, Germany.
North, W. J. 1976. Aquaculture techniques for creating and restoring beds of giant kelp,
Macrocystis spp. Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada 33:1015–1023.
North, W. J. 1980. Trace metals in giant kelp, Macrocystis. American Journal of Botany
67:1097–1101.
North, W. J. 1983. Separating the effects of temperature and nutrients. Pp. 243–255. In Bascom, W. (ed.), The Effects of Waste Disposal on Kelp Communities. Southern California
Coastal Water Research Project, Long Beach, CA.
North, W. J. 1987a. Biology of the Macrocystis resource in North America. Pp. 265–311. In
Doty, M. S., Caddy, J. F., and Santelices, B. (eds), Case Studies of Seven Seaweed Resources.
FAO Fisheries Technical Paper No. 281. FAO, Rome, Italy.
North, W. J. 1987b. Oceanic farming of Macrocystis, the problems and non-problems. Pp.
39–67. In Bird, T. K. and Benson, P. H. (eds), Seaweed Cultivation for Renewable Resources.
Elsevier, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
North, W. J. T. Liu, J. Chen, and Suo, R. 1988. Cultivation of Laminaria and
Macrocystis (Laminariales, Phaeophyta) in the Peoples Republic of China. Phycologia 27:
298–299.
North, W. J. 1994. Review of Macrocystis biology. Pp. 447–527. In Akatsuka, I. (ed.), Biology
of Economic Algae. SPB Academic Publishing, The Hague, the Netherlands.
North, W. J. 1998. Interview by S. Erwin. Oral History Project, California Institute of
Technology. accessed October 15, 2013, http://oralhistories.library.caltech.edu/34/1
/OH_North_W.pdf.
North, W. J. and Hubbs, C. L. 1968. Utilization of kelp-bed resources in southern California. The
Resources Agency, California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, CA.
North, W. J. and Pearse, J. S. 1970. Sea urchin population explosion in southern California
coastal waters. Science 167:209–210.
North, W. J. and Schaefer, M. B. 1964. An Investigation of the Effects of Discharged Wastes on
Kelp. The Resources Agency of California, State Water Quality Control Board Publication,
Sacramento, CA.
North, W. J., Neushul, M., and Clendenning, K. A. 1964. Successive biological changes
observed in a marine cove exposed to a large spillage of mineral oil. Pp. 335–354. In Pollution Marines par les Produits Petroliers, Symposium de Monaco, Monaco.

REFERENCES

•

3 61

North, W. J., Gerard, V., and McPeak, R. 1981. Experimental fertilizing of coastal Macrocystis
beds. Proceedings of the International Seaweed Symposium 10:613–618.
North, W. J., Gerard, V., and Kuwabara, J. S. 1982. Farming Macrocystis at coastal and oceanic
sites. Pp. 247–264. In Srivastava, L. M. (ed.), Synthetic and Degradative Processes in marine
macrophytes. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, Germany.
Norton, T. A., Mathieson, A. C., and Neushul, M. 1981. Morphology and environment.
Pp. 421–451. In Lobban, C. S. and Wynne, M. J. (eds), The Biology of Seaweeds. University
of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Norton, T. A., Mathieson, A. C., and Neushul, M. 1982. A review of some aspects of form and
function in seaweeds. Botanica Marina 25:501–510.
Nowlis, J. S. 2000. Short-and long-term effects of three fishery-management tools on
depleted fisheries. Bulletin of Marine Science 66:651–662.
NRC (National Research Council). 2003. Oil in the Sea. III. The National Academies Press,
Washington, DC.
Nyman, M. A., Murray, T. B., Neushul, M., and Keogh, J. A. 1990. Macrocystis pyrifera in New
Zealand: testing two mathematical models for whole plant growth. Journal of Applied
Phycology 2:249–257.
O’Connor, K. C. and Anderson, T. W. 2010. Consequences of habitat disturbance and recovery to recruitment and the abundance of kelp forest fishes. Journal of Experimental Marine
Biology and Ecology 386:1–10.
Occhipinti-Ambrogi, A. 2007. Global change and marine communities: alien species and
climate change. Marine Pollution Bulletin 55:342–352.
Ojeda, F. P. and Santelices, B. 1984. Invertebrate communities in holdfasts of the kelp Macrocystis pyrifera from southern Chile. Marine Ecology Progress Series 16:65–73.
Okamoto, D. K., Stekoll, M. S., and Eckert, G. L. 2013. Coexistence despite recruitment inhibition of kelps by subtidal algal crusts. Marine Ecology Progress Series 493:103–112.
Okey, T. A. 2003. Macrobenthic colonist guilds and renegades in Monterey Canyon (USA)
drift algae: partitioning multidimensions. Ecological Monographs 73:415–440.
Oppliger, L. V., Correa, J. A., Engelen, A. H., Tellier, F., and Vieira, V. 2012. Temperature
effects on gametophyte life-history traits and geographic distribution of two cryptic kelp
species. PLOS ONE 7:e39289.
Ostarello, G. l. 1973. Natural history of hydrocoral Allopora californica Verill (1866). Biological
Bulletin 145:548–564.
Ostfeld, R. S. 1982. Foraging strategies and prey switching in the California sea otter. Oecologia 53:170–178.
Pace, D. 1981. Kelp community development in Barkley Sound, British Columbia following sea
urchin removal. Pp. 457–463. In Fogg, G. E. and Eifion Jones, W. (eds), Proceedings of the 8th
International Seaweed Symposium. The Marine Sciences Laboratories, Menai Bridge, UK.
Page, H. M., Reed, D. C., Brzezinski, M. A., Melack, J. M., and Dugan, J. E. 2008. Assessing
the importance of land and marine sources of organic matter to kelp forest food webs.
Marine Ecology Progress Series 360:47–62.
Page, H. M., Brooks, A. J., Kulbicki, M., Galzin, R., Miller, R. J., Reed, D. C. et al. 2013. Stable
isotopes reveal trophic relationships and diet of consumers in temperate kelp forest and
coral reef ecosystems. Oceanography 26:180–189.

362

•

REFERENCES

Paine, R. T. 1980. Food webs: linkage, interaction strength and community infrastructure.
Journal of Animal Ecology 49:667–685.
Pandolfi, J. M., Connolly, S. R., Marshall, D. J., and Cohen, A. L. 2011. Projecting coral reef
futures under global warming and ocean acidification. Science 333:418–422.
Papenfuss, G. 1942. Studies of South African Phaeophyceae. I. Ecklonia maxima, Laminaria
pallida, Macrocystis pyrifera. American Journal of Botany 29:15–24.
Parfrey, L. W., Barbero, E., Lasser, E., Dunthorn, M., Bhattacharya, D., Patterson, D. J.
et al. 2006. Evaluating support for the current classification of eukaryotic diversity. PLOS
Genetics 2:2062–2073.
Parker, B. C. 1965. Translocation in the giant kelp Macrocystis I. rates, direction, quantity of
C14 labelled products and fluorescein. Journal of Phycology 1:41–46.
Parker, B. C. 1971. The internal structure of Macrocystis. Pp. 99–121. In North, W. J. (ed.),
The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag Von
J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Parker, B. C. and Dawson, E. Y. 1965. Fleshy seaweeds from California Miocene deposits.
American Journal of Botany 52:643.
Parnell, P. E., Dayton, P. K., Lennert-Cody, C. E., Rasmussen, L. L., and Leichter, J. J. 2006.
Marine reserve design: optimal size, habitats, species affi nities, diversity, and ocean
microclimate. Ecological Applications 16:945–962.
Parnell, P. E., Miller, E. F., Lennert-Cody, C. E., Dayton, P. K., Carter, M. L., and Stebbins,
T. D. 2010. The response of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) in southern California to
low-frequency climate forcing. Limnology and Oceanography 55:2686–2702.
Pauly, D., Christensen, V., Dalsgaard, J., Froese, R., and Torres, F. J. 1998. Fishing down
marine food webs. Science 279:860–863.
Pearse, J. S. and Hines, A. H. 1977. Ecological studies in a kelp forest inhabited by sea otters.
Journal of Phycology 13:S52.
Pearse, J. S. and Hines, A. H. 1979. Expansion of a central California kelp forest following
mass mortality of sea urchins. Marine Biology 51:83–91.
Pearse, J. S. and Hines, A. H. 1987. Long-term population dynamics of sea urchins in a
central California kelp forest: rare recruitment and rapid decline. Marine Ecology Progress
Series 39:275–283.
Pearse, J. S. and Lowry, L. F. 1974. An Annotated Species List of the Benthic Algae and Invertebrates in the Kelp Forest Community At Point Cabrillo, Pacifi c Grove, California. Technical
Report Number 1, Coastal Marine Laboratory (now Institute of Marine Sciences), University of California, Santa Cruz, CA.
Pearse, J. S., Clark, M. E., Leighton, D. L., Mitchell, C. T., and North, W. J. 1970. Marine waste
disposal and sea urchin ecology. In Kelp Habitat Improvement Project, Annual Report, 1
July 1969-30 June 1970. California Institute of Technology. Pasadena. CA.
Pearse, J. S., Costa, D. P., Yellin, M. B., and Agegian, C. R. 1977. Localized mass mortality
of red sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus franciscanus, near Santa Cruz, California. Fishery
Bulletin 75:647–648.
Pearse, J. S., Mooi, R., Lockhart, S. J., and Brandt, A. 2009. Brooding and species diversity
in the Southern Ocean: selection for brooders or speciation within brooding clades?
Pp. 181–196. In Krupnik, I., Lang, M. A., and Miller, S. E. (eds), Smithsonian at the Poles:

REFERENCES

•

3 63

Contributions to International Polar Year Science. Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press,
Washington, DC.
Pearse, J. S., Carr, M. H., Baxter, C. H., Watanabe, J. M., Foster, M. S., Steller, D. L. et al. 2013.
Kelpbeds as classrooms: perspectives and lessons learned. Pp. 133–142. In Lang, M. A.,
Marinelli, R. L., Roberts, S. J., and Taylor, P. R. (eds), Research and Discoveries: The Revolution
of Science through Scuba. Smithsonian Contributions to the Marine Sciences, Washington,
DC.
Pearson, G. A., Serrao, E. A., and Brawley, S. H. 1998. Control of gamete release in fucoid
algae: sensing hydrodynamic conditions via carbon acquisition. Ecology 79:1725–1739.
Pendleton, L. H. and Rooke, J. 2006. Understanding the Potential Economic Impact of Marine
Recreational Fishing: California. http://www.dfg.ca.gov/mlpa/pdfs/binder3di.pdf.
Pequegnat, W. E. 1964. The epifauna of California siltstone reef. Ecology 45:272–283.
Pérez-Matus, A. and Shima, J. S. 2010. Density- and trait-mediated effects of fish predators
on amphipod grazers: potential indirect benefits for the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera.
Marine Ecology Progress Series 417:151–U168.
Pérez-Matus, A., Ferry-Graham, L. A., Cea, A., and Vásquez, J. A. 2007. Community structure of temperate reef fishes in kelp-dominated subtidal habitats of northern Chile.
Marine and Freshwater Research 58:1069–1085.
Perissinotto, R. and McQuaid, C. D. 1992. Deep occurrence of the giant kelp Macrocystis
laevis in the Southern Ocean. Marine Ecology Progress Series 81:89–95.
Perry, A. L., Low, P. J., Ellis, J. R., and Reynolds, J. D. 2005. Climate change and distribution
shifts in marine fishes. Science 308:1912–1915.
Peters, A. F. and Breeman, A. M. 1993. Temperature tolerance and latitudinal range of brown
algae from temperate Pacific South America. Marine Biology 115:143–150.
Peters, R. H. 1988. Some general problems for ecology illustrated by food web theory. Ecology
69:1673–1676.
Peterson, N. M., Peterson, M. J., and Peterson, T. R. 2005. Conservation and the myth of
consensus. Conservation Biology 19:762–767.
Pidwirny, M. 2006. Earth-Sun Relationships and Insolation. In Pidwirny, M. (ed.) Fundamentals of Physical Geography. 2nd ed., University of British Columbia. http://www
.physicalgeography.net/fundamentals/chapter7.html.
Pimm, S., Jenkins, C., Abell, R., Brooks, T., Gittleman, J., Joppa, L., et al. 2014. The biodiversity of species and their rates of extinction, distribution, and protection. Science
344:1246752.
Pinnegar, J. K., Polunin, N. V. C., Francour, P., Badalamenti, F., Chemello, R., HarmelinVivien, M. L. et al. 2000. Trophic cascades in benthic marine ecosystems: lessons for
fisheries and protected-area management. Environmental Conservation 27:179–200.
Pirker, J. G. 2002. Demography, Biomass Production and Effects of Harvesting Giant Kelp
Macrocystis pyrifera (Linnaeus) in Southern New Zealand. PhD thesis. University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Pirker, J. G., Schiel, D. R., and Lees, H. 2000. Seaweed Products for Barrel Culture Paua
Farming. TBGF Project: Contract SR1401. University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New
Zealand.
Platt, J. R. 1964. Strong inference. Science 146:347–353.

364

•

REFERENCES

Polis, G. A. 1991. Complex trophic interactions in deserts: an empirical critique of food web
theory. American Naturalist 138:123–155.
Polis, G. A. 1999. Why are parts of the world green? Multiple factors control productivity and
the distribution of biomass. Oikos 86:3–15.
Polis, G. A., Anderson, W. B., and Holt, R. D. 1997. Toward an integration of landscape and
food web ecology: the dynamics of spatially subsidized food webs. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 28:289–316.
Polis, G. A., Sears, A. L. W., Huxel, G. R., Strong, D. R., and Maron, J. 2000. When is a trophic
cascade a trophic cascade? Trends in Ecology and Evolution 15:473–475.
Ponce-Díaz , G., Lluch-Cota, S. E., Bautista-Romero, J. J., and Lluch-Belda, D. 2003. Multiscale characterization of the sea temperature in an area of abalone banks (Haliotis spp.) at
Bahia Asuncion, Baja California Sur, Mexico. Ciencias Marinas 29:291–303.
Porzio, L., Buia, M. C., and Hall-Spencer, J. M. 2011. Effects of ocean acidification on macroalgal communities. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 400:278–287.
Power, M. E., Tilman, D., Estes, J. A., Menge, B. A., Bond, W. J., Mills, L. S. et al. 1996. Challenges in the quest for keystones. Bioscience 46:609–620.
Prescott, J. H. 1959. Rafting of jack rabbit on kelp. Journal of Mammalogy 40:443–444.
Price, M. L. 2008. A Biography of Conrad Limbaugh. University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA.
Quast, J. C. 1971a. Some physical aspects of the inshore environment particularly as it affects
kelp bed fishes. Pp. 229–240. In North, W. J. (ed.), The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag Von J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Quast, J. C. 1971b. Fish fauna of the rocky inshore zone. Pp. 481–507. In North, W. J. (ed.),
The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32. Verlag Von
J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Quast, J. C. 1971c. Observations on the food of the kelp bed fishes Pp. 541–579. In North,
W. J. (ed.), The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32.
Verlag Von J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.
Raimondi, P., Cailliet, G., and Foster, M. S. 2005. Diablo Canyon Power Plant: Independent
Scientist’s Recommendations to the Regional Board Regarding “Mitigation” for Cooling
Water Impacts. California central coast regional water quality control Board, San Luis
Obispo, CA.
Raimondi, P. T., Reed, D. C., Gaylord, B., and Washburn, L. 2004. Effects of self-fertilization
in the giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera. Ecology 85:3267–3276.
Raimondi, P. T., Wilson, M. C., Ambrose, R. F., Engle, J. M., and Minchinton, T. E. 2002.
Continued declines of black abalone along the coast of California: are mass mortalities
related to El Niño events? Marine Ecology Progress Series 242:143–152.
Rainey, C. 1998. Wet Suit Pursuit: Hugh Bradner’s Development of the First Wet Suit. Archives
of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography. University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA.
Rassweiler, A., Arkema, K. K., Reed, D. C., Zimmerman, R. C., and Brzezinski, M. A. 2008.
Net primary production, growth, and standing crop of Macrocystis pyrifera in Southern
California. Ecology 89:2068–2068.
Reed, D. C. 1987. Factors affecting the production of sporophylls in the giant kelp Macrocystis
pyrifera. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 113:61–69.

REFERENCES

•

365

Reed, D. C. 1990a. The effects of variable settlement and early competition on patterns of
kelp recruitment. Ecology 71:776–787.
Reed, D. C. 1990b. An experimental evaluation of density dependence in a subtidal algal
population. Ecology 71:2286–2296.
Reed, D. C. and Brzezinski, M. A. 2009. Kelp forests. Pp. 31–37. In Laffoley, D. and
Grimsditch, G. (eds), The Management of Natural Coastal Carbon Sinks. IUCN, Gland,
Switzerland.
Reed, D. C. and Foster, M. S. 1984. The effects of canopy shading on algal recruitment and
growth in a giant kelp forest. Ecology 65:937–948.
Reed, D. C., Laur, D. R., and Ebeling, A. W. 1988. Variation in algal dispersal and recruitment: the importance of episodic events. Ecological Monographs 58:321–335.
Reed, D. C., Neushul, M., and Ebeling, A. W. 1991. Role of settlement density on gametophyte growth and reproduction in the kelps Pterogophora californica and Macrocystis
pyrifera (Phaeophyceae). Journal of Phycology 27:361–366.
Reed, D. C., Amsler, C. D., and Ebeling, A. W. 1992. Dispersal in kelps: factors affecting
spore swimming and competency. Ecology 73:1577–1585.
Reed, D. C., Lewis, R. J., and Anghera, M. 1994. Effects of an open coast oil production
outfall on patterns of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) recruitment. Marine Biology
120:25–31.
Reed, D. C., Ebeling, A. W., Anderson, T. W., and Anghera, M. 1996. Differential reproductive responses to fluctuating resources in two seaweeds with different reproductive strategies. Ecology 77:300–316.
Reed, D. C., Anderson, T. W., Ebeling, A. W., and Anghera, M. 1997. The role of reproductive
synchrony in the colonization potential of kelp. Ecology 78:2443–2457.
Reed, D. C., Brzezinski, M. A., Coury, D. A., Graham, W. M., and Petty, R. L. 1999. Neutral
lipids in macroalgal spores and their role in swimming. Marine Biology 133:737–744.
Reed, D. C., Raimondi, P. T., Carr, M. H., and Goldwasser, L. 2000. The role of dispersal
and disturbance in determining spatial heterogeneity in sedentary organisms. Ecology
81:2011–2026.
Reed, D. C., Schroeter, S. C., and Raimondi, P. T. 2004. Spore supply and habitat availability
as sources of recruitment limitation in the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera (Phaeophyceae).
Journal of Phycology 40:275–284.
Reed, D. C., Schroeter, S. C., and Huang, D. 2006. An Experimental Investigation of the Use
of Artificial Reefs to Mitigate the Loss of Giant Kelp Forest Habitat. A Case Study of the San
Onofre Nuclear Generating Station’s Artifi cial Reef Project. California Sea Grant College
Program, University of California, San Diego, CA.
Reed, D. C., Schroeter, S. C., Huang, D., Anderson, T. W., and Ambrose, R. F. 2006. Quantitative assessment of different artificial reef designs in mitigating losses to kelp forest
fishes. Bulletin of Marine Science 78:133–150.
Reed, D. C., Kinlan, B. P., Raimondi, P. T., Washburn, L., Gaylord, B., and Drake, P. T. 2006. A
metapopulation perspective on patch dynamics and connectivity of giant kelp. Pp. 352–386.
In Kritzer, J. P. and Sale, P. F. (eds), Marine Metapopulations. Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Reed, D. C., Rassweiler, A., and Arkema, K. K. 2008. Biomass rather than growth rate determines variation in net primary production by giant kelp. Ecology 89:2493–2505.

366

•

REFERENCES

Reed, D. C, Rassweiler, A., and Arkema, K. 2009. Density derived estimates of standing
crop and net primary production in the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera. Marine Biology
156:2077–2083.
Reed, D. C., Rassweiler, A., Carr, M. H., Cavanaugh, K. C., Malone, D. P., and Siegel, D. A.
2011. Wave disturbance overwhelms top-down and bottom-up control of primary production in California kelp forests. Ecology 92:2108–2116.
Revelle, R. and Wheelock, C. D. 1954. An Oceanographic Investigation of Conditions in the
Vicinity of Whites Point and Hyperion Sewage Outfall, Los Angeles, California. Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA.
Reynolds, R. A. and Wilen, J. E. 2000. The sea urchin fishery: harvesting, processing and the
market. Marine Resources Economics 15:115–126.
Ridgway, K. 2007. Long-term trend and decadal variability of the southward penetration of
the East Australian Current. Geophysical Research Letters 34:L13613.
Riedman, M. L. and Estes, J. A. 1988. A review of the history, distribution and foraging ecology of sea otters. Pp. 4–21. In Van Blaricom, G. R. and Estes, J. A. (eds), The Community
Ecology Of Sea Otters. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
Riedman, M. L., Hines, A. H., and Pearse, J. S. 1981. Spatial segregation of four species of
turban snails (Gastropoda, Tegula) in central California. Veliger 24:97–102.
Rios, C., Arntz, W. E., Gerdes, D., Mutschke, E., and Montiel, A. 2007. Spatial and temporal
variability of the benthic assemblages associated to the holdfasts of the kelp Macrocystis
pyrifera in the Straits of Magellan, Chile. Polar Biology 31:89–100.
Riosmena-Rodriguez, R., Boo, G. H., Lopez-Vivas, J. M., Hernández-Velasco, A., Saenz-A
rroyo, A., and Boo, S. M. 2012. The invasive seaweed Sargassum filicinum (Fucales,
Phaeophyceae) is on the move along the Mexican Pacific coastline. Botanica Marina 55:
547–551.
Roberson, L. M. and Coyer, J. A. 2004. Variation in blade morphology of the kelp Eisenia
arborea: incipient speciation due to local water motion? Marine Ecology Progress Series
282:115–128.
Roberts, C. M. 2000. Selecting marine reserve locations: optimality versus opportunism.
Bulletin of Marine Science 66:581–592.
Roberts, C. M. and Polunin, N. V. C. 1991. Are marine reserves effective in management of
reef fisheries? Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries 1:65–91.
Roberts, D. A., Johnston, E. L., and Knott, N. A. 2010. Impacts of desalination plant discharges on the marine environment: a critical review of published studies. Water Research
44:5117–5128.
Rodriguez, G. E., Rassweiler, A., Reed, D. C., and Holbrook, S. J. 2013. The importance of
progressive senescence in the biomass dynamics of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera). Ecology 94:1848–1858.
Roesijadi, G. S., Jones, S. B., Snowden-Swan, L. J., and Zhu, Y. 2010. Macroalgae as a Biomass
Feedstock: A Preliminary Analysis. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Report PNNL19944. US National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA.
Rogers-Bennett, L. 2013. Strongylocentrotus franciscanus and Strongylocentrotus purpuratus.
Pp. 413–435. In Lawrence, J. M. (ed.), Sea Urchins: Biology and Ecology. Elsevier, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

REFERENCES

•

3 67

Rogers-Bennett, L., Haaker, P. L., Karpov, K. A., and Kushner, D. J. 2002. Using spatially
explicit data to evaluate marine protected areas for abalone in southern California. Conservation Biology 16:1308–1317.
Roleda, M. Y., Morris, J. N., McGraw, C. M., and Hurd, C. L. 2012. Ocean acidification and
seaweed reproduction: increased CO2 ameliorates the negative effect of lowered pH on
meiospore germination in the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera (Laminariales, Phaeophyceae). Global Change Biology 18:854–864.
Roleda, M. Y., Boyd, P. W., and Hurd, C. L. 2012. Before ocean acidification: calcifier chemistry lessons. Journal of Phycology 48:840–843.
Rosell, K. G. and Srivastava, L. M. 1985. Seasonal variations in total nitrogen, carbon and
amino acids in Macrocystis integrifolia and Nereocystis luetkeana (Phaeophyta). Journal of
Phycology 21:304–309.
Rosenberg, G., Littler, D. S., Littler, M. M., and Oliveira, E. C. 1995. Primary production and
photosynthetic quotients of seaweeds from Sao Paolo State, Brazil. Botanica Marina
38:369–377.
Rosenthal, R. J., Clarke, W. D., and Dayton, P. K. 1974. Ecology and natural history of a stand
of giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, off Del-Mar, California. Fishery Bulletin 72:670–684.
Rosman, J. H., Koseff, J. R., Monismith, S. G., and Grover, J. 2007. A field investigation into
the effects of a kelp forest (Macrocystis pyrifera) on coastal hydrodynamics and transport.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 112:C2.
Rothäusler, E., Gomez, I., Hinojosa, I. A., Karsten, U., Miranda, L., Tala, F. et al. 2011. Kelp
rafts in the Humboldt Current: interplay of abiotic and biotic factors limit their floating
persistence and dispersal potential. Limnology and Oceanography 56:1751–1763.
Rowley, R. J. 1989. Settlement and recruitment of sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus spp) in
a sea urchin barren ground and a kelp bed: are populations regulated by settlement or
post-settlement processes. Marine Biology 100:485–494.
Rowley, R. J. 1994. Marine reserves in fisheries management. Aquatic Conservation: Marine
and Fresh Water Ecosystems 4:233–254.
The Royal Society. 2005. Ocean Acidification due to Increasing Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide.
Policy document 12 / 05. The Royal Society, London, UK.
Russell, L. K., Hepburn, C. D., Hurd, C. L., and Stuart, M. D. 2008. The expanding range of
Undaria pinnatifida in southern New Zealand: distribution, dispersal mechanisms and
the invasion of wave-exposed environments. Biological Invasions 10:103–115.
Sagarin, R. D., Barry, J. P., Gilman, S. E., and Baxter, C. H. 1999. Climate-related change
in an intertidal community over short and long time scales. Ecological Monographs
69:465–490.
Saito, Y. 1975. Undaria. Pp. 304–320. In Tokida, J. and Hirose, H. (eds), Advances in Phycology in Japan. Dr W Junk, The Hague, the Netherlands.
Sala, E., Boudouresque, C. F., and Harmelin-Vivien, M. 1998. Fishing, trophic cascades, and
the structure of algal assemblages: evaluation of an old but untested paradigm. Oikos
82:425–439.
Sala, E. and Dayton, P. K. 2011. Predicting strong community impacts using experimental
estimates of per capita interaction strength: benthic herbivores and giant kelp recruitment. Marine Ecology 32:300–312.

368

•

REFERENCES

Sala, E. and Graham, M. H. 2002. Community-wide distribution of predator-prey interaction
strength in kelp forests. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99:3678–3683.
Sala, E., Boudouresque, C. F., and Harmelin-Vivien, M. 1998. Fishing, trophic cascades, and
the structure of algal assemblages: evaluation of an old but untested paradigm. Oikos
82:425–439.
Sala, E., Ribes, M., Hereu, B., Zabala, M., Alva, V., Coma, R. et al. 1998. Temporal variability in abundance of the sea urchins Paracentrotus lividus and Arbacia lixula in the
northwestern Mediterranean: comparison between a marine reserve and an unprotected
area. Marine Ecology Progress Series 168:135–145.
Sale, P. F. 1978. Coexistence of coral reef fishes – a lottery for living space. Environmental
Biology of Fishes 3:85–102.
Sale, P. F., Cowen, R. K., Danilowics, B. S., Jones, G. P., Kritzer, J. P., Lindeman, K. C. et al..
2005. Critical science gaps impede use of no-take fishery reserves. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution 20:74–80.
Sanbonsuga, Y. and Neushul, M. 1978. Hybridization of Macrocystis (Phaeophyta) with other
float-bearing kelps. Journal of Phycology 14:214–224.
Sanbonsuga, Y. and Neushul, M. 1980. Hybridization and genetics of algae. Pp. 69–83. In
Gantt, E. (ed.), Handbook of Phycological Methods: Developmental and Cytological Methods.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Santelices, B. 1990. Patterns of reproduction, dispersal and recruitment in seaweeds. Oceanography and Marine Biology: An Annual Review 28:177–276.
Santelices, B. 1991. Littoral and sublittoral communities of continental Chile. Pp. 347–369.
In Mathieson, A. C. and Nienhuis, P. H. (eds), Ecosystems of the World 24: Intertidal and
Littoral Ecosystems. Elsevier, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Santelices, B. and Ojeda, F. P. 1984a. Population dynamics of coastal forests of Macrocystis
pyrifera in Puerto Toro, Isla Navarino, Southern Chile. Marine Ecology Progress Series 14:
175–183.
Santelices, B. and Ojeda, F. P. 1984b. Effects of canopy removal on the understory algal community structure of coastal forests of Macrocystis pyrifera from southern South America.
Marine Ecology Progress Series 14:165–173.
Sargent, M. C. and Lantrip, L. W. 1952. Photosynthesis, growth and translocation in giant
kelp. American Journal of Botany 39:99–107.
Saunders, G. W. and Druehl, L. D. 1992. Nucleotidesequence of the small subunit ribosomal
RNA genes from selected Laminariales (Phaeophyta): implications for kelp evolution.
Journal of Phycology 28:544–549.
Saupe, S. 2011. Afognak Island Macrocystis pyrifera. Pp. 41. Kodiak Island Marine Science
Symposium. Alaska Sea Grant Program, Fairbanks, AK.
Scagel, R. F. 1947. An investigation on marine plants near Hardy Bay, B.C. B.C. Provincial
Department of Fisheries, Report No. 1, Victoria, BC, Canada, 70 pp.
SCE (Southern California Edison Company). 2001. Report of 2000 Data, Marine Environmental Analysis and Interpretation. San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, Southern
California Edison Company, Rosemead, CA.
Schaal, G., Riera, P., and Leroux, C. 2012. Food web structure within kelp holdfasts
(Laminaria): a stable isotope study. Marine Ecology 33:370–376.

REFERENCES

•

369

Schaeffer, T., Foster, M., Landrau, M., and Walder, R. 1999. Diver disturbance in kelp forests. California Fish and Game 85:170–176.
Schaffelke, B. and Hewitt, C. L. 2007. Impacts of introduced seaweeds. Botanica Marina
50:397–417.
Scheffer, M. and Carpenter, S. R. 2003. Catastrophic regime shifts in ecosystems: linking
theory to observation. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 18:648–656.
Scheffer, M., Carpenter, S., Foley, J. A., Folke, C., and Walker, B. 2001. Catastrophic shifts in
ecosystems. Nature 413:591–596.
Scheffer, M., Carpenter, S., and de Young, B. 2005. Cascading effects of overfishing marine
systems. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 20:579–581.
Scheibling, R. E. 1986. Increased macroalgal abundance following mass mortalities of sea
urchins Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis along the Atlantic coast of Nova Scotia. Oecologia 68:186–198.
Scheibling, R. E. 1996. The role of predation in regulating sea urchin populations in eastern
Canada. Oceanologica Acta 19:421–430.
Scheibling, R. E. and Stephenson, R. L. 1984. Mass mortality of Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis (Echinodermata, Echinoidea) off Nova Scotia, Canada. Marine Biology 78:153–164.
Scheibling, R. E. and Lauzon-Guay, J. S. 2010. Killer storms: North Atlantic hurricanes and
disease outbreaks in sea urchins. Limnology and Oceanography 55:2331–2338.
Scheibling, R. E., Feehan, C., and Lauzon-Guay, J. S. 2010. Disease outbreaks associated with
recent hurricanes cause mass mortality of sea urchins in Nova Scotia. Marine Ecology
Progress Series 408:109–116.
Schiel, D. R. 1982. Selective feeding by the echnoid, Evechinus chloroticus and the removal
of plants from subtidal algal stands in northern New Zealand. Oecologia 54:379–388.
Schiel, D. R. 1985. A short-term demographic study of Cystoseira osmundacea (Fucales, Cystoseiraceae) in central California. Journal of Phycology 21:99–106.
Schiel, D. R. 1988. Algal interactions on shallow subtidal reefs in Northern New Zealand: a
review. New Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research 22:481–489.
Schiel, D. R. 1990. Macroalgal assemblages in New Zealand – structure, interactions and
demography. Hydrobiologia 192:59–76.
Schiel, D. R. 1997. Review of abalone culture and research in New Zealand. Molluscan
Research 18:289–298.
Schiel, D. R. 2006. Rivets or bolts? When single species count in the function of temperate rocky reef communities. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 338:
233–252.
Schiel, D. R. 2009. Multiple stressors and disturbances: when change is not in the nature
of things. Pp. 281–294. in Wahl, M. (ed.), Marine Hard Bottom Communities: Patterns,
Dynamics, Diversity and Change. Springer, Berlin, Germany.
Schiel, D. R. 2011. Biogeographic patterns and long-term changes on New Zealand coastal
reefs: non-trophic cascades from diff use and local impacts. Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology 400:33–51.
Schiel, D. R. 2013. The other 93%: trophic cascades, stressors, and managing coastlines
in non-marine protected areas. New Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research
47:374–391.

370

•

REFERENCES

Schiel, D. R. and Choat, J. H. 1980. Effects of density on monospecific stands of marine
algae. Nature 285:324–326.
Schiel, D. R. and Foster, M. S. 1986. The structure of subtidal algal stands in temperate
waters. Oceanography and Marine Biology: An Annual Review 24:265–307.
Schiel, D. R. and Foster, M. S. 1992. Restoring kelp forests. Pp. 279–342. In Thayer, G.
(ed.), Restoring the Nation’s Marine Environments. Maryland Sea Grant College, College
Park, MD.
Schiel, D. R. and Foster, M. S. 2006. The population biology of large brown seaweeds: ecological consequences of multiphase life histories in dynamic coastal environments. Annual
Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 37:343–372.
Schiel, D. R. and Hickford, M. J. H. 2001. Biological Structure of Nearshore Rocky Subtidal
Habitats in Southern New Zealand. Science for Conservation, Department of Conservation, Wellington, New Zealand.
Schiel, D. R. and Thompson, G. A. 2012. Demography and population biology of the invasive
kelp Undaria pinnatifida on shallow reefs in southern New Zealand. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 434:25–33.
Schiel, D. R., Andrew, N. L., and Foster, M. S. 1995. The structure of subtidal algal and invertebrate assemblages at the Chatham Islands, New Zealand. Marine Biology 123:355–367.
Schiel, D. R., Steinbeck, J. R., and Foster, M. S. 2004. Ten years of induced ocean warming
causes comprehensive changes in marine benthic communities. Ecology 85:1833–1839.
Schmitt, R. J. 1982. Consequences of dissimilar defenses against predation in a subtidal
marine community. Ecology 63:1588–1601.
Schmitt, R. J. 1987. Indirect interactions between prey: apparent competition, predator
aggregation and habitat segregation. Ecology 68:1887–1897.
Schmitt, R. J. 1996. Exploitation competition in mobile grazers: trade-offs in use of a limited
resource. Ecology 77:408–425.
Schmitt, R. J. and Holbrook, S. J. 1990. Contrasting effects of giant kelp on dynamics of
surfperch populations. Oecologia 84:419–429.
Schmitt, R. J., Osenberg, C. W., and Bercovitch, M. G. 1983. Mechanisms and consequences
of shell fouling in the kelp snail, Norrisia norrisi (Sowerby) (Trochidae): indirect effects of
octopus drilling. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 69:267–281.
Schmitz, K. and Srivastava, L. M. 1974. Fine structure and development of sieve tubes in
Laminaria groenlandica Rosenv. Cytobiologie 10:66–87.
Schofield, O., Ducklow, H. W., Martinson, D. G., Meredith, M. P., Moline, M. A., and Fraser,
W. R. 2010. How do polar marine ecosystems respond to rapid climate change? Science
328:1520–1523.
Schroeder, D. M. and Love, M. S. 2002. Recreational fishing and marine fish populations in
California. CalCOFI Report 43:182–190.
Schroeter, R. E. and Moyle, P. B. 2006. Alien species. Pp. 611–620. In Allen, L. G., Pondella,
D. J., and Horn, M. H. (eds), The Ecology of Marine Fishes: California and Adjacent Waters.
University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Schroeter, S. C., Dixon, J. D., Kastendiek, J., and Smith, R. O. 1993. Detecting the ecological effects of environmental impacts: a case study of kelp forest invertebrates. Ecological
Applications 3:331–350.

REFERENCES

•

371

Schurz, W. L. 1917. The Manila galleon and California. The Southwestern Historical Quarterly
21:107–126.
Scuba Advisor. 2012. Scuba destinations. http://www.scubaadvisor.com.
Seaweed Energy Solutions. 2012. http://seaweedenergysolutions.com.
Selig, E. R. and Bruno, J. F. 2010. A global analysis of the effectiveness of marine protected
areas in preventing coral loss. PLOS ONE 5:e9278.
Sellheim, K., Stachowicz, J. J., and Coates, R. C. 2010. Effects of a nonnative habitat-forming
species on mobile and sessile epifaunal communities. Marine Ecology Progress Series
398:69–80.
Serrao, E. A., Kautsky, L., and Brawley, S. H. 1996. Distributional success of the marine
seaweed Fucus vesiculosus L in the brackish Baltic Sea correlates with osmotic capabilities
of Baltic gametes. Oecologia 107:1–12.
Setchell, W. A. 1893. On the classification and geographical distribution of the Laminariaceae. Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Science 9:333–375.
Setchell, W. A. 1908. Nereocystis and Pelagophycus. Botanical Gazette 45:125–134.
Setchell, W. A. 1932. Macrocystis and its holdfasts. University of California Publications in
Botany 16:445–492.
Seymour, R. J. 1983. Extreme Waves in California During Winter 1983. California Department
of Boating and Waterways, Sacramento, CA.
Shaffer, J. A. 2000. Seasonal variation in understory kelp bed habitats of the Strait of Juan
de Fuca. Journal of Coastal Research 16:768–775.
Shanks, A. L., Grantham, B. A., and Carr, M. H. 2003. Propagule dispersal distance and the
size and spacing of marine reserves. Ecological Applications 13(S1):S159–S169.
Shears, N. T. and Babcock, R. C. 2002. Marine reserve demontrate top-down control of community structure on temperate reefs. Oceologia 132:131–142.
Shears, N. T. and Babcock, R. C. 2003. Continuing trophic cascade effects after 25 years of
no-take marine reserve protection. Marine Ecology Progress Series 246:1–16.
Shears, N. T., Babcock, R. C., and Salomon, A. K. 2008. Context-dependent effects of fishing: variation in trophic cascades across environmental gradients. Ecological Applications
18:1860–1873.
Shears, N. T., Kushner, D. J., Katz, S. L., and Gaines, S. D. 2012. Reconciling conflict between
the direct and indirect effects of marine reserve protection. Environmental Conservation
39:225–236.
Shephard, S. A. and Sanderson, C. 2013. The giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera. Pp. 79–86. In
Shepard, S. A. and Edgar, G. J. (eds), Ecology of Australian Temperate Reefs: The Unique
South. CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, Australia.
Sherlock, V., Pickmere, S., Currie, K., Hadfield, M., Nodder, S., and Boyd, P. W. 2007. Predictive
accuracy of temperature-nitrate relationships for the oceanic mixed layer of the New Zealand
region. Journal of Geophysical Research-Oceans 112:C06010. doi:10.1029/2006JC003562.
Shimek, S. J. 1977. The underwater foraging habits of the sea otter, Enhydra lutris. California
Fish and Game 63:120–122.
Silva, P. C. 1962. Comparison of algal floristic patterns in the Pacific with those in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, with special reference to Codium. Pp. 201–216. In Proceedings of
the 9th Pacific Science Congress, Bangkok, Thailand.

372

•

REFERENCES

Simberloff, D. 2004. Community ecology: is it time to move on? American Naturalist
163:787–799.
Simenstad, C. A., Estes, J. A., and Kenyon, K. W. 1978. Aleuts, sea otters and alternate stable
state communities. Science 200:403–411.
Singer, M. M., George, S., Jacobson, S., Lee, I., Weetman, L. L., Tjeerdema, R. S. et al. 1995.
Acute toxicity of oil dispersant Corexit- 9954 to marine organisms. Ecotoxicology and
Environmental Safety 32:81–86.
Skottsberg, C. 1907. Zur kenntnis der Subantarktischen und Antarktischen Meeresalgen. I. Phaeophyceen. Wissenschafliche Ergenbnisse Schwedisch Süpolar-Expedition 4:1–172. (in German)
Skottsberg, C. 1911. The Wilds of Patagonia. Edward Arnold, London.
Smale, D. A., Burrows, M. T., Moore, P., O’Connor, N., and Hawkins, S. J. 2013. Threats and
knowledge gaps for ecosystem services provided by kelp forests: a northeast Atlantic perspective. Ecology and Evolution 3:4016–4038.
Smith, J. M. B. and Bayliss-Smith, T. P. 1998. Kelp-plucking: coastal erosion facilitated
by bull-kelp Durvillaea antarctica at subantarctic Macquarie Island. Antarctic Science
10:431–438.
Sousa, W. P. 2001. Natural disturbance and the dynamics of marine benthic communities.
Pp. 85–130. In Bertness, M. D., Gaines, S., and Hay, M. E. (eds), Marine Community Ecology. Sinauer Assoc., Sunderland, MA.
Spalding, H., Foster, M. S., and Heine, J. N. 2003. Composition, distribution, and abundance of deep-water (> 30 m) macroalgae in central California. Journal of Phycology
39:273–284.
Spalding, M. D., Fox, H. E., Halpern, B. S., McManus, M. A., Molnar, J., Allen, G. R. et al.
2007. Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas.
Bioscience 57:573–583.
Springer, Y. P., Hays, C. G., Carr, M. H., and Mackey, M. R. 2010. Toward ecosystem-based
management of marine macroalgae – the bull kelp, Nereocystis luetkeana. Oceanography
and Marine Biology: An Annual Review 48:1–42.
Stachowicz, J. J. and Byrnes, J. E. 2006. Species diversity, invasion success, and ecosystem
functioning: disentangling the influence of resource competition, facilitation, and extrinsic factors. Marine Ecology Progress Series 311:251–262.
Stanford, E. C. 1883. On algin: a new substance obtained from some of the commoner species of marine algae. The Chemical News 47:254–257.
Stanley, S. M. 2009. Earth System History. 3rd ed. W.H. Freeman, New York.
Steele, M. A., Schroeter, S. C., Carpenter, R. C., and Kushner, D. J. 2006. Top-down vs.
bottom-up effects in kelp forests. Science 313:1738.
Steinbeck, J., Schiel, D. R., and Foster, M. S. 2005. Detecting long-term changes in complex communities: a case study for the rocky intertidal zone. Ecological Applications
15:1813–1832.
Steinberg, P. D., Estes, J. A., and Winter, F. C. 1995. Evolutionary consequences of foodchain length in kelp forest communities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
92:8145–8148.
Steneck, R. S. 1998. Human influences on coastal ecosystems: does overfishing create trophic cascades? Trends in Ecology and Evolution 13:429–430.

REFERENCES

•

373

Steneck, R. S., Graham, M. H., Bourque, B. J., Corbett, D., Erlandson, J. M., Estes, J. A. et al.
2002. Kelp forest ecosystems: biodiversity, stability, resilience and future. Environmental
Conservation 29:436–459.
Stephens, J. 2001. California sheephead. Pages 155-156. In Leet, W. S., Dewees, C. M., Kingbell, R., and Larson, E. J. (eds), California’s Living Marine Resources: A Status Report. California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, CA.
Stephenson, A. 1977. Age determination and morphological variation of Ontario otters.
Canadian Journal of Zoology 55:1577–1583.
Stevens, C. A., Hurd, C. L., and Smith, M. J. 2001. Water motion relative to subtidal kelp
fronds. Limnology and Oceanography 46:668–678.
Stewart, H. L., Fram, J. P., Reed, D. C., Williams, S. L., Brzezinski, M. A., MacIntyre, S. et al.
2009. Differences in growth, morphology and tissue carbon and nitrogen of Macrocystis
pyrifera within and at the outer edge of a giant kelp forest in California, USA. Marine
Ecology Progress Series 375:101–112.
Stokstad, E. 2012. Engineered superbugs boost hopes of turning seaweed into fuel. Science
335:273.
Stokstad, E. 2014. Death of the stars. Science 344:464–467.
Strange, E., Allen, D., Mills, D., and Raimondi, P. 2004. Research on Estimating the Environmental Benefits of Restoration to Mitigate or Avoid Environmental Impacts Caused by
California Power Plant Cooling Water Intake Structures. California Energy Commission
Report 500-04-092. California Energy Commission, Sacramento, CA.
Strong, D. R. 1992. Are trophic cascades all wet? Differentiation and donor control in speciose ecosystems. Ecology 73:747–754.
Strong, D. R. 1997. Quick indirect interactions in intertidal food webs. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution 12:173–174.
Sutherland, W. J. and Woodroof, H. J. 2009. The need for environmental horizon scanning.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 24:523–527.
Sverdrup, H. V., Johnson, M. W., and Fleming, R. H. 1942. The Oceans. Prentice-Hall Inc,
New York.
Swartz, R. C., Cole, F. A., Schults, D. W., and Deben, W. A. 1986. Ecological changes in the
southern California bight near a large sewage outfall: benthic conditions in 1980 and
1983. Marine Ecology Progress Series 31:1–13.
Sydeman, W. J., Garcia-Reyes, M., Schoeman, D. S., Rykaczewski, R. R., Thompson, S. A.,
Black, B. A. et al. 2014. Climate change and wind intensification in coastal upwelling
ecosystems. Science 345:77–80.
Sykes, M. 1908. Anatomy and histology of Macrocystis pyrifera and Laminaria saccharina.
Annals of Botany 22:291–325.
Syms, C. and Carr, M. H. 2001. Marine protected areas: evaluating MPA effectiveness in
an uncertain world. Marinet: North American Commission for Environmental
Cooperation. www.orchestrabycrossdraw.com/30/Posting.cfm?2B07183C303E151A0109
7F505D546A.
Tait, L. W. and Schiel, D. R. 2011. Legacy effects of canopy disturbance on ecosystem functioning in macroalgal assemblages. PLOS ONE 6: e26986.

3 74

•

REFERENCES

Tarasoff, F. and Kooyman, G. 1973. Observations on the anatomy of the respiratory system
of the river otter, sea otter, and harp seal. I. The topography, weight, and measurements
of the lungs. Canadian Journal of Zoology 51:163–170.
Taylor, D. I. and Schiel, D. R. 2003. Wave-related morality in zygotes of habitat-forming algae
from different exposures in southern New Zealand: the importance of “stickability”. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 290:229–245.
Taylor, D. I. and Schiel, D. R. 2010. Algal populations controlled by fish herbivory across a
wave exposure gradient on southern temperate shores. Ecology 91:201–211.
Taylor, D. I, Delaux, S., Stevens, C., Nokes, R., and Schiel, D. 2010. Settlement rates of macroalgal propagules: cross-species comparisons in a turbulent environment. Limnology
and Oceanography 55:66–76.
Tegner, M. J. 1980. Multispecies considerations of resource management in southern
California kelp beds. Canadian Technical Report of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences
954:125–143.
Tegner, M. J. 1993. Southern California abalones: can stocks be rebuilt using marine harvest
refugia. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 50:2010–2018.
Tegner, M. J. and Dayton, P. K. 1981. Population structure, recruitment and mortality of two
sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus franciscanus and S. purpuratus) in a kelp forest. Marine
Ecology Progress Series 5:255–268.
Tegner, M. J. and Dayton, P. K. 1987. El Niño effects on southern California kelp forest communities. Advances in Ecological Research 17:243–279.
Tegner, M. J. and Dayton, P. K. 2000. Ecosystem effects of fishing in kelp forest communities. ICES Journal of Marine Science 57:579–589.
Tegner, M. J. and Levin, L. 1982. Do sea urchins and abalones compete in California kelp forest communities. Pp. 265–271. In Proceedings of the International Echinoderms Conference
(Tampa Bay). AA Balkema, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Tegner, M. J. and Levin, L. A. 1983. Spiny lobsters and sea urchins: analysis of a predator prey
interaction. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 73:125–150.
Tegner, M. J., Dayton, P. K., Edwards, P. B., and Riser, K. L. 1995. Sea urchin cavitation of
giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera Agardh, C.) holdfasts and its effects on kelp mortality
across a large California forest. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology
191:83–99.
Tegner, M. J., Dayton, P. K., Edwards, P. B., Riser, K. L., Chadwick, D. B., Dean, T. A. et al.
1995. Effects of a large sewage spill on a kelp forest community: catastrophe or disturbance? Marine Environmental Research 40:181–224.
Tegner, M. J., Basch, L. V., and Dayton, P. K. 1996. Near extinction of an exploited marine
invertebrate. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 11:278–208.
Tegner, M. J., Dayton, P. K., Edwards, P. B., and Riser, K. L. 1997. Large-scale, low-frequency
oceanographic effect on kelp forest succession: a tale of two cohorts. Marine Ecology Progress Series 146:117–134.
Tegner, M. J., Haaker, P. L., Riser, K. L., and Vilchis, L. I. 2001. Climate variability, kelp
forests, and the southern California red abalone fishery. Journal of Shellfish Research
20:755–764.

REFERENCES

•

375

Tellier, F., Meynard, A. P., Correa, J. A., Faugeron, S., and Valero, M. 2009. Phylogeographic
analyses of the 30° S south-east Pacific biogeographic transition zone establish the
occurrence of a sharp genetic discontinuity in the kelp Lessonia nigrescens: vicariance or
parapatry? Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 53:679–693.
Thiel, M. and Gutow, L. 2005a. The ecology of rafting in the marine environment. I. The
floating substrata. Oceanography and Marine Biology: An Annual Review 42:181–264.
Thiel, M. and Gutow, L. 2005b. The ecology of rafting in the marine environment. II. The
rafting organisms and community. Oceanography and Marine Biology: An Annual Review
43:279–418.
Thiel, M., Macaya, E. C., Acuna, E., Arntz, W. E., Bastias, H., Brokordt, K. et al. 2007. The
Humboldt current system of northern and central Chile. Oceanography and Marine Biology: An Annual Review 45:195–344.
Thompson, G. A. and Schiel, D. R. 2012. Resistance and facilitation by native algal communities in the invasion success of Undaria pinnatifida. Marine Ecology Progress Series
468:95–105.
Thompson, W. C. 1959. Attachment of the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera in fine sediments
and its biological and geological significance. P.586. In Proceedings of the International
Oceanographic Congress. American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington, DC.
Thomsen, M. S., Wernberg, T., Tuya, F., and Silliman, B. R. 2009. Evidence for impacts
of non-indigenous macroalgae: a meta-analysis of experimental field studies. Journal of
Phycology 45:812819.
Thornber, C. S., Kinlan, B. P., Graham, M. H., and Stachowicz, J. J. 2004. Population ecology of the invasive kelp Undaria pinnatifida in California: environmental and biological
controls on demography. Marine Ecology Progress Series 268:69–80.
Thrush, S. F. and Dayton, P. K. 2010. What can ecology contribute to ecosystem-based management? Annual Review of Marine Science 2:419–441.
Tianjing Liu, T. J., Tianjing Liu, T. J., Suo, R. Y., Liu, X. Y., Hu, D. Q., Shi, Z. J., Liu, G. Y.
et al. 1984. Studies on the artificial cultivation and propagation of giant kelp (Macrocystis
pyrifera). Hydrobiologia 116:259–262.
Tinker, M. T., Bentall, G., and Estes, J. A. 2008. Food limitation leads to behavioral diversification and dietary specialization in sea otters. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 105:560–565.
Todd, N. P. M. 2012. The 1961 Rutherford Jubilee Conference: perspectives from 2011. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 381:012127.
Dieck, T.I. 1993. Temperature tolerance and survival in darkness of kelp gametophytes
(Laminariales, Phaeophyta): ecological and biogeographical implications. Marine Ecology
Progress Series 100:253–264.
Tomczak, M. and Godfrey, J. S. 2003. Regional Oceanography: An Introduction. 2nd ed. Daya
Publishing House, Delhi, India.
Torres-Moye, G., Edwards, M. S., and Montaño-Moctezuma, C. G. 2013. Benthic community
structure in kelp forests from the Southern California Bight. Ciencias Marinas 39:239–252.
Tovey, D. J. and Moss, B. L. 1978. Attachment of haptera of Laminaria digitata (Huds)
Lamour. Phycologia 17:17–22.

376

•

REFERENCES

Towle, D. W. and Pearse, J. S. 1973. Production of the giant kelp, Macrocystis, estimated by in
situ incorporation of 14C in polyethlene bags. Limnology and Oceanography 18:155–159.
Townsend, M., Thrush, S. F., and Carbines, M. J. 2011. Simplifying the complex: an “ecosystem principles approach” to goods and services management in marine coastal ecosystems. Marine Ecology Progress Series 434:291–301.
Trent, J., Wiley, P., Tozzi, S., McKuin, B., and Reinsch, S. 2012. Research spotlight: the
future of biofuels: is it in the bag? Biofuels 3:521–524.
Turner, C. H., Ebert, E. E., and Given, R. R. 1968. The Marine Environment Off shore from Point
Loma, San Diego County, California. Fish Bulletin 146, California Department of Fish and
Game, Sacramento, CA.
Turner, N. 1995. Food Plants of Coastal First Peoples. University of British Columbia Press,
Vancouver, Canada.
Turpen, S., Hunt, J. W., Anderson, B. S., and Pearse, J. S. 1994. Population structure, growth,
and fecundity of the kelp forest mysid Holmesimysis costata in Monterey Bay, California.
Journal of Crustacean Biology 14:657–664.
Turrentine, J. W. 1926. Potash: A Review, Estimate and Forecast. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Tutschulte, T. C. and Connell, J. H. 1988. Feeding behavior and algal food of three species
of abalones (Haliotis) in southern California. Marine Ecology Progress Series 49:57–64.
Twain, M. 1897. Quote within a note from Mark Twain to Frank Marshall White. Reprinted
in Fishkin, S. F. 1996. Lighting out for the Territory: Refl ections on Mark Twain and American Culture. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
UCSB (University of Santa Barbara). 2012. SONGS mitigation monitoring. http:www
.marinemitigation.msi.ucsb.edu/index.html.
Underwood, A. J. 1986. What is a community? Pp. 351–367. in Raup, D. M. and Jablonski,
D. (eds), Patterns and Processes in the History of Life. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
Underwood, A. J. 1999. Physical disturbances and their direct effect on an indirect effect:
responses of an intertidal assemblage to a severe storm. Journal of Experimental Marine
Biology and Ecology 232:125–140.
USDA (United States Department of Agriculture). 2012. National Nutrient Data Base. http://
www.ndb.nal.usda.gov.
USDE (United States Department of Energy). 2012. Alternative fuels – ethanol. www
.fueleconomy.gov.
USDT (United States Department of Tranportation). 2011. Motor Fuel. US Department of
Transporation, Federal Highway Administration, www.f hwa.dot.gov.
Utter, B. D. and Denny, M. W. 1996. Wave-induced forces on the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera (Agardh): field test of a computational model. The Journal of Experimental Biology
199:2645–2654.
Uwai, S. Y., Nelson, W., Neill, K., Wang, W. D., Aguilar-Rosas, L. E., Boo, S. M. et al. 2006.
Genetic diversity in Undaria pinnatifida (Laminariales, Phaeophyceae) deduced from mitochondria genes origins and succession of introduced populations. Phycologia 45:687–695.
Vadas, R. L. 1977. Preferential feeding: optimization strategy in sea urchins. Ecological
Monographs 47:337–371.
Vadas, R. L., Wright, W. A., and Miller, S. L. 1990. Recruitment of Ascophyllum nodosum:
wave action as a source of mortality. Marine Ecology Progress Series 61:263–272.

REFERENCES

•

377

Vadas, R. L., Johnson, S., and Norton, T. A. 1992. Recruitment and mortality of early postsettlement stages of benthic algae. British Phycological Journal 27:331–351.
Valentine, J. P. and Johnson, C. R. 2003. Establishment of the introduced kelp Undaria
pinnatifida in Tasmania depends on disturbance to native algal assemblages. Journal of
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 295:63–90.
Valentine, J. P. and Johnson, C. R. 2005. Persistence of the exotic kelp Undaria pinnatifida
does not depend on sea urchin grazing. Marine Ecology Progress Series 285:43–55.
VanBlaricom, G. R. and Estes, J. A. 1988. The Community Ecology of Sea Otters. SpringerVerlag, New York.
Vance, R. R. 1979. Effects of grazing by the sea urchin, Centrostephanus coronatus, on prey
community composition. Ecology 60:537–546.
van den Hoek, C. 1982. The distribution of benthic marine algae in relation to the
temperature regulation of their life histories. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society
18:81–144.
Vanderklift, M. A. and Wernberg, T. 2008. Detached kelps from distant sources are a food
subsidy for sea urchins. Oecologia 157:327–335.
van Tamelen, P. G. and Woodby, D. 2001. Macrocystis biomass, quality, and harvesting effects
in relation to the herring spawn-on-kelp fishery in Alaska. The Alaska Fisheries Research
Bulletin 8:118–131.
Van Tussenbroek, B. I. 1989. Seasonal growth and composition of fronds of Macrocystis pyrifera in the Falkland Islands. Marine Biology 100:419–430.
VanWagenen, R. F., Foster, M. S., and Bunns, F. 1981. Sea otter predation on birds near Monterey, California. Journal of Mammalogy 62:433–434.
Vásquez, J. A. 1993. Effects on the animal community of dislodgement of holdfasts of Macrocystis pyrifera. Pacific Science 47:180–184.
Vásquez, J. A. 2008. Production, use and fate of Chilean brown seaweeds: resources for a
sustainable fishery. Journal of Applied Phycology 20:457–467.
Vásquez, J. A. and Buschmann, A. H. 1997. Herbivore-kelp interactions in Chilean subtidal
communities: a review. Revista Chilena De Historia Natural 70:41–52.
Vásquez, J. A. and McPeak, R. H. 1998. A new tool for kelp restoration. California Fish and
Game 84:149–158.
Vásquez, J. A., Castilla, J. C., and Santelices, B. 1984. Distribution patterns and diets of four
species of sea-urchins in giant kelp forest (Macrocystis pyrifera) of Pureto Toro, Navarino
Island, Chile. Marine Ecology Progress Series 19:55–63.
Vásquez, J. A., Alonso Vega, J. M., and Buschmann, A. H. 2006. Long term variability in
the structure of kelp communities in northern Chile and the 1997-98 ENSO. Journal of
Applied Phycology 18:505–519.
Vásquez, X., Gutiérrez, A., Buschmann, A. H., Flores, R., Farías, D., and Leal, P. 2014. Evaluation of repopulation techniques for the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera (Laminariales).
Botanica Marina 57:123–130.
Velimirov, B. and Griffiths, C. L. 1979. Wave-induced kelp movement and its importance for
community structure. Botanica Marina 22:169–172.
Verges, A., Steinberg, P. D., Hay, M. E., Poore, A. G. B., Campbell, A. H., Ballesteros, E. et al.
2014. The tropicalization of temperate marine ecosystems: climate-mediated changes

378

•

REFERENCES

in herbivory and community phase shifts. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 281:20140846.
Vetter, E. W. 1995. Detritus based patches of high secondary production in the nearshore
benthos. Marine Ecology Progress Series 120:251–262.
Vetter, E. W. 1998. Population dynamics of a dense assemblage of marine detritivores. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 226:131–161.
Vetter, E. W. and Dayton, P. K. 1999. Organic enrichment by macrophyte detritus, and abundance patterns of megafaunal populations in submarine canyons. Marine Ecology Progress
Series 186:137–148.
Villegas, M. J., Laudien, J., Sielfeld, W., and Arntz, W. E. 2007. Macrocystis integrifolia
and Lessonia trabeculata (Laminariales; Phaeophyceae) kelp habitat structures and
associated macrobenthic community off northern Chile. Helgoland Marine Research
62:33–43.
Villouta, E. and Santelices, B. 1984. Estructura de la comunidad submareal de Lessonia
(Phaeophyta, Laminariales) en Chile norte y central. Revista Chilena De Historia Natural
57:111–122. (in Spanish)
Vogel, S. 1994. Life in Moving Fluids. 2nd ed. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Voltaire, F. M. A. 1759. Candide, ou l’optimisme. Paris, Siréne, France. (in French)
Walker, F. T. 1952. Chromosome number of Macrocystis integrifolia Bory. Annals of Botany
16:23–27.
Wargacki, A. J., Leonard, E., Win, M. N., Regitsky, D. D., Santos, C. N. S., Kim, P. B. et al.
2012. An engineered microbial platform for direct biofuel production from brown macroalgae. Science 335:308–313.
Watanabe, J. M. 1984a. The influence of recruitment, competition and benthic predation on
spatial distribution of three species of kelp forest gastropods (Trochidae, Tegula). Ecology
65:920–936.
Watanabe, J. M. 1984b. Food preference, food quality and diets of three herbivorous gastropods (Trochidae, Tegula) in a temperate kelp forest habitat. Oecologia 62:47–52.
Watanabe, J. M. and Harrold, C. 1991. Destructive grazing by sea urchins Strongylocentrotus
spp. in a central California kelp forest: potential roles of recruitment, depth and predation. Marine Ecology Progress Series 71:125–141.
Watanabe, J. M., Phillips, R. E., Allen, N. H., and Anderson, W. A. 1992. Physiological
response of the stipitate understory kelp, Pterygophora californica Ruprecht, to shading
by the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera C. Agardh. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology
and Ecology 159:237–252.
Waters, D. L., Oda, K. T., and Mello, J. 2001. Pacific herring. Pp. 456–459. In Leet, W. S.,
Dewees, C. M., Klingbeil, R., and Larson, E. J. (eds), California’s Living Marine Resources:
A Status Report. California Department Fish and Game, Sacramento, CA.
Waters, T. 2002. The paddy principle. Pp. 111–114. In Gibson, B. (ed.), Off shore Saltwater
Fishing. Creative Publishing International, Minnetonka, MN.
Watson, J. 2000. The effects of sea otters (Enhydra lutris) on abalone (Haliotis spp.) populations. Pp. 123–132. In Campbell, A. (ed.), Workshop on Rebuilding Abalone Stocks in British
Columbia. Canadian Special Publication on Fisheries and Aquatic Science, NRC Research
Press, Canada.

REFERENCES

•

3 79

Watson, J. and Estes, J. A. 2011. Stability, resilience, and phase shifts in rocky subtidal
communities along the west coast of Vancouver Island, Canada. Ecological Monographs
81:215–239.
Weaver, A. M. 1977. Aspects of the Effects of Particulate Matter on the eCology of a Kelp Forest
(Macrocystis pyrifera (L.) C.A. Agardh) Near a Small Domestic Sewer Outfall. PhD thesis.
Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Wernberg, T., Thomsen, M. S., Tuya, F., Kendrick, G. A., Staehr, P. A., and Toohey, B. D. 2010.
Decreasing resilience of kelp beds along a latitudinal temperature gradient: potential
implications for a warmer future. Ecology Letters 13:685–694.
Wernberg, T., Russell, B. D., Moore, P. J., Ling, S. D., Smale, D. A., Campbell, A. et al. 2011.
Impacts of climate change in a global hotspot for temperate marine biodiversity and
ocean warming. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 400:7–16.
Westermeier, R. and Möller, P. 1990. Population dynamics of Macrocystis pyrifera (L) C
Agardh in the rocky intertidal of southern Chile. Botanica Marina 33:363–367.
Westermeier, R., Patino, D., and Müller, D. G. 2007. Sexual compatibility and hybrid formation between the giant kelp species Macrocystis pyrifera and M. integrifolia (Laminariales,
Phaeophyceae) in Chile. Journal of Applied Phycology 19:215–221.
Westermeier, R., Patino, D. J., Murua, P., and Müller, D. G. 2011. Macrocystis mariculture
in Chile: growth performance of heterosis genotype constructs under field conditions.
Journal of Applied Phycology 23:819–825.
Westermeier, R., Murua, P., Patino, D. J., Muñoz, L., Ruiz, A., and Mueller, D. G. 2012. Variations of chemical composition and energy content in natural and genetically defined cultivars of Macrocystis from Chile. Journal of Applied Phycology 24:1191–1201.
Westermeier, R., Murua, P., Patino, D. J., Munoz, L., Ruiz, A., Atero, C. et al. 2013. Utilization
of holdfast fragments for vegetative propagation of Macrocystis integrifolia in Atacama,
Northern Chile. Journal of Applied Phycology 25:639–642.
Wheeler, P. A. and North, W. J. 1981. Nitrogen supply, tissue composition and frond
growth-rates for Macrocystis pyrifera off the coast of southern California. Marine Biology
64:59–69.
Wheeler, W. N. 1980a. Effect of boundary layer transport on the fi xation of carbon by the
giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera. Marine Biology 56:103–110.
Wheeler, W. N. 1980b. Pigment content and photosynthetic rate of the fronds of Macrocystis
pyrifera. Marine Biology 56:97–102.
Wheeler, W. N. 1982. Nitrogen nutrition of Macrocystis. Pp. 121–135. In Srivastava, L. M. (ed.),
Synthetic and Degradative Processes in Marine Macrophytes. Walter de Gruyter, New York.
Wheeler, W. N. and Druehl, L. D. 1986. Seasonal growth and productivity of Macrocystis
integrifolia in British Columbia, Canada. Marine Biology 90:181–186.
Wheeler, W. N. and Neushul, M. 1981. The aquatic environment. Pp. 229–247. In Lange,
O. L., Nobel, P. S., Osmond, C. B., and Ziegler, H. (eds), Encyclopedia of Plant Physiology.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
Widdowson, T. B. 1970. A taxonomic revision of the genus Alaria Greville. Syesis 4:11–49.
Wild, P. W. and Ames, J. A. 1974. A Report on the Sea Otter, Enhydra lutris L., in California.
California Department of Fish and Game Marine Resources Technical Report 20, California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento, CA.

380

•

REFERENCES

Wildish, D. J. and Kristmanson, D. D. 1997. Benthic Suspension Feeders and Flow. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Williams, T. D., Allen, D. D., Groff, J. M., and Glass, R. L. 1992. An analysis of California sea
otter (Enhydra lutris) pelage and integument. Marine Mammal Science 8:1–18.
Wilmers, C. C., Estes, J. A., Edwards, M., Laidre, K. L., and Konar, B. 2012. Do trophic cascades affect the storage and flux of atmospheric carbon? An analysis of sea otters and kelp
forests. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 10:409–415.
Wilson, K. C. and McPeak, R. 1983. Kelp restoration. Pp. 199–216. In Bascom, W. (ed.),
The Effects of Waste Disposal on Kelp Communities. Southern California Coastal Water
Research Project, Long Beach, CA.
Wilson, K. C. and Togstad, H. 1983. Storm caused changes in the Palos Verdes kelp forest. Pp. 301–307. In Bascom, W. (ed.), The Effects of Waste Disposal on Kelp Communities.
Southern California Coastal Water Research Project, Long Beach, CA.
Wing, S. R. and Patterson, M. R. 1993. Effects of wave-induced lightflecks in the intertidal
zone on photosynthesis in the macroalgae Postelsia palmaeformis and Hedophyllum sessile
(Phaeophyceae). Marine Biology 116:519–525.
Womersley, H. B. S. 1954. The species of Macrocystis with special reference to those on southern Australian coasts. University of California Publications in Botany 27:109–132.
Wood, H. L., Spicer, J. I., and Widdicombe, S. 2008. Ocean acidification may increase
calcification rates, but at a cost. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
275:1767–1773.
Woodhouse, C. D., Cowen, R. K., and Wilcoxon, L. R. 1977. A Summary of Knowledge of the
Sea Otter, Enhydra lutris L., in California and an Appraisal of the Completeness of Biological Understanding of the Species. Final Report to U.S. Marine Mammal Commission for
Contract MM6AC008. U.S. Marine Mammal Commission, Washington, DC.
Worm, B., Sandow, M., Oschlies, A., Lotze, H. K., and Myers, R. A. 2005. Global patterns of
predator diversity in the open oceans. Science 309:1365–1369.
Worm, B., Barbier, E. B., Beaumont, N., Duff y, E., Folke, C., Halpern, B. S. et al. 2006.
Impacts of biodiversity loss on ocean ecosystem services. Science 314:787–790.
Wotton, D. M., O’Brien, C., Stuart, M. D., and Fergus, D. J. 2004. Eradication success down
under: heat treatment of a sunken trawler to kill the invasive seaweed Undaria pinnatifida. Marine Pollution Bulletin 49:844–849.
Wright, S. 1943. Isolation by distance. Genetics 28:114–138.
Yabu, H. and Sanbonsuga, Y. 1987. Chromosome count in Macrocystis integrifolia Bory. Bulletin of the Faculty of Fisheries Hokkaido University 38:339–342.
Yaninek, J. S. 1980. Beach Wrack: Phenology of an Imported Resource and Utilization by Macroinvertebrates of Sandy Beaches. MSc thesis. University of California, Berkeley, CA.
Yeates, L. C., Williams, T. M., and Fink, T. L. 2007. Diving and foraging energetics of the
smallest marine mammal, the sea otter (Enhydra lutris). Journal of Experimental Biology
210:1960–1970.
Yellin, M. B., Agegian, C. R., and Pearse, J. S. 1977. Ecological Benchmarks in the Santa Cruz
County Kelp Forests before the Re-Establishment of Sea Otters. Technical Report Number
6, Center for Coastal Marine Studies (now Institute of Marine Sciences), University of
California, Santa Cruz, CA.

REFERENCES

•

3 81

Yoklavich, M., Cailliet, G., Lea, R. N., Greene, H. G., Starr, R., De Marignac, J. et al. 2002.
Deepwater habitat and fish resources associated with the Big Creek Marine Ecological
Reserve. CalCOFI Reports 43:120–140.
Yoon, H. S., Hackett, J. D., Ciniglia, C., Pinto, G., and Bhattacharya, D. 2004. A molecular
timeline for the origin of photosynthetic eukaryotes. Molecular Biology and Evolution
21:809–818.
Yoon, H. S., Lee, J. Y., Boo, S. M., and Bhattacharya, D. 2001. Phylogeny of Alariaceae, Laminariaceae, and Lessoniaceae (Phaeophyceae) based on plastid-encoded RuBisCo spacer
and nuclear-encoded ITS sequence comparisons. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution
21:231–243.
York, R. and Foster, M. S. 2005. Issues and Environmental Impacts Associated with OnceThrough Cooling at California’s Coastal Power Plants. California Energy Commission,
Sacramento, CA.
Yorke, C. E., Miller, R. J., Page, H. M., and Reed, D. C. 2013. Importance of kelp detritus as
a component of suspended particulate organic matter in giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera
forests. Marine Ecology Progress Series 493:113–125.
Young, I. R., Zieger, S., and Babanin, A. V. 2011. Global trends in wind speed and wave
height. Science 332:451–455.
Zaytsev, O., Cervantes-Duarte, R., Montante, O., and Gallegos-Garcia, A. 2003. Coastal
upwelling activity on the pacific shelf of the Baja California Peninsula. Journal of Oceanography 59:489–502.
Zimmerman, M. B. 2009. Iodine deficiency. Endocrine Reviews 30:376–408.
Zimmerman, R. C. and Kremer, J. N. 1984. Episodic nutrient supply to a kelp forest ecosystem in Southern California. Journal of Marine Research 42:591–604.
Zimmerman, R. C. and Kremer, J. N. 1986. In situ growth and chemical composition of the
giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, response to temporal changes in ambient nutrient availability. Marine Ecology Progress Series 27:277–285.
Zimmerman, R. C. and Robertson, D. L. 1985. Effects of El Niño on local hydrography and
growth of the giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, at Santa Catalina Island, California. Limnology and Oceanography 30:1298–1302.
ZoBell, C. E. 1971. Drift seaweeds on San Diego County beaches. Pp. 269–314. In North,
W. J. (ed.), The Biology of Giant Kelp Beds (Macrocystis) in California. Nova Hedwigia 32.
Verlag Von J. Cramer, Lehre, Germany.

382

•

REFERENCES

INDEX

Note: Page number followed by (f) and (t) indicates fi gure and table respectively.
abalone, 111, 122(f ), 123, 125–26, 130, 166–67,
192–93, 238, 249, 251, 253, 261, 298. See
also black abalone; pink abalone; red
abalone
abiotic environment, 11, 41–69
boundary layer effects, 67–69
impingement forces, 63–67
inertial forces, 63–67
light, 49–55, 54(f ), 55(f )
nutrients, 39(t), 55–60
sedimentation, 43–45
substratum, 43–45
temperature, 45–49
water motion, 60–63, 62(f ), 63(f )
abiotic environment dispersal, recruitment,
disease (ADRD), 160(f )
abiotic requirements, 37–40, 38(t), 41, 91
acetone, 240
acha, 251, 255
Acrocarpia paniculata, 116(f ), 121
Agarum fimbriatum, 109, 137
Agave americana, 25

Agulhas, South Africa, 13(f ), 120
Akaroa Harbour, 76
Alaria esculenta, 37(f ), 291
Alaria marginata, 76, 107(f ), 113
Alaska, 12, 15, 42, 55, 109–14, 119, 178, 190, 199,
209, 212, 227
Aleutian Islands, Alaska, 109, 119, 207, 211
algin, 19, 240–41, 246–47
alginate, 5(f ), 19, 235–36, 238, 239(f ), 240, 242,
247
types, 240
uses, 241
Alia carinata, 192
alternative stable states, communities, 101, 198,
211, 308
ammonium, 56, 59–60, 68
amphipods, 28(f ), 119, 126–27, 142(f ), 143,
145–48, 178, 193, 202
Amphiroa spp., 107
Ampithoe humeralis, 180(t), 193, 202
Ampithoe rubricata, 180(t), 193
Amsterdam–Saint Paul Islands, 120

3 83

Anacapa Island, 62, 109, 137–38, 204, 277
Año Nuevo Island, 65, 110, 112
Antarctic Circle, 123
Antarctic Circumpolar Current, 13(f ), 14, 97, 114,
118, 123, 144
anthropogenic effects, 217–34
boat traffic, 224–25
coastal modification, 220–21
harvesting, 225–27
industrial waste discharge, 218–20
intakes and discharges from desalination
plants, 221–23
intakes and discharges from power plants,
221–23
introduced species, 227–34
invasive species, 227–34, 228(f )
runoff, 220–21
sewage discharge, 218–20
toxic spills, 224–25, 225(f )
Aplodactylus punctatus, 118
Aplysia californica, 168, 180(t), 192
aquaculture, 226–28, 230, 233, 238, 246–47
and biomass, 246
Arbacia dufresnei, 118, 191
Ardea herodias, 111
Arenaria melanocephala, 146
Argentina, 22, 64, 118–19, 193, 230–31, 238
Arroyo Quemado kelp forest, 106(f ), 108–9, 111
artificial reefs, 261–63
Ascophyllum nodosum, 240
Asparagopsis armata, 115(f ), 117
Auckland Islands, 124–25, 236
Aulacomya ater, 120
Australia, 6, 19, 22, 96, 120–23, 178, 184, 191,
228, 256, 278
marine protected areas (MPAs), 269
Australian Environmental Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act, 121
Austrocidaris canaliculata, 191
BACI (before-after control impact) design, 280
Bahía Asunción, 104, 105(f )
Bahía Magdalena, 104
Baja California, 12, 17, 46, 56–57, 102, 104, 228–29
Balanophyllia elegans, 108, 174
Ballantine, Bill, 266
barren grounds, 182, 191, 197, 266, 273. See also
barrens

384

•

INDEX

barrens, 123, 182, 184–89, 205, 207, 208(f ),
213(f ), 275
basal dichotomy, 25
Bass Strait, 120–21, 184
bat stars, 108–9, 111, 133, 179(t), 191
Bauhin, Johann, 17, 22(f )
beaches, 142(f ), 144–46
beach wrack, 28(f ), 145
Beagle Channel, 115(f ), 118–19
Bermagui, New South Wales, 121
Big Creek Marine Ecological Reserve, 274
biofuel sequestration, 241–45
biogeography, 11–16
biomass, 27, 65, 124, 139, 148–49, 151–52, 155,
243
aquaculture, 246
mesograzer biomass, 165(f )
plant, 30, 31, 83, 198, 245
sporophyll, 83
vegetative, 32, 83
wrack, 146
black abalone, 193, 254–55, 277
black rot, 20
bocaccio, 249, 275
Bossiella californica, 125
Bossiella orbigniana, 107
boulders, 43, 106(f ), 107(f ), 108, 110, 113, 115(f ),
125–27, 132, 166, 262, 274
boundary layer, 11, 33, 58, 67–69, 87, 88(f), 89, 305
and water motion, 11, 26, 32–33, 41–45, 51, 58,
67–68
Bowerbankia gracilisi, 233
Brachyistius frenatus, 128(f ), 164, 202
British Columbia, 67, 107(f ), 113
Brittany, France, 247
bronze-spotted rockfish, 250
brown algae, 3–4, 5(f ), 7–9, 34, 90, 96, 102,
103(f ), 107, 112, 117, 124–25, 135, 166, 170,
186, 232
Bugula neritina, 233
cabezon, 249
Cabrillo, 17
calcification, 296–97
Calidris alba, 146
California, 9, 9(f ), 10, 17, 19, 21, 43, 46, 56–57,
60, 62, 64–65, 67, 81, 113, 119, 126, 130–39,
207

biofuel sequestration, 242–43
Calliostoma, 192
commercial fishing, 251–55
courses, 258–59
fish–habitat associations, 127
grazing invertebrates in, 179(t)–80(t)
harvesting in, 225–26
introduced species, 228
marine protected areas (MPAs), 265–82
marine recreation, 248
sheephead, 107–9, 200, 203, 249, 252, 253(f ),
276(f )
sport fishing in, 248–51
California Coastal Commission, 263
California Department of Fish and Game (also as
California Department of Fish and
Wildlife), 20, 249–52, 259, 268, 272
Calliarthron spp., 105(f ), 106(f ), 110–11, 126–27
Calliarthron tuberculosum, 169
Calliostoma, 179(t), 192
Callophyllis sp., 120
Calvata gigantea, 31
Canada, 9, 19, 22, 202
Canary rockfish, 250
Cape Horn Current, 118
carbohydrate, 59, 236, 245
carbon dioxide concentrations, 286, 289(f )
carbon fixation, 67
carbon sequestration, 241–45
Carmel Bay, 110
Carmel Submarine Canyon, 147
Carpinteria, California, 219
Carpophyllum maschalocarpum, 116(f ), 122–23
Castilla, Juan Carlos, 266
Castor, 265
Catalina Island, 56, 64, 119, 127, 167
Celleporella hyalina, 194
Cenolia trichoptera, 116(f ), 121
Centrostephanus coronatus, 190
Centrostephanus rodgersii, 116(f ), 121, 184, 186,
205, 206(f ), 233, 260, 280, 292
Channel Islands, 108–9, 132, 157, 191, 201,
203–4, 211, 272, 277, 279(f )
Channel Islands National Park, southern
California, 182, 191
Chatham Islands, New Zealand, 121–23, 231
Cheilodactylus variegatus, 118
chemicals, 240–41

Chile, 6, 16, 32–33, 67, 76, 96, 118–19, 183, 246
commercial fishing, 255
Crepipatella fecunda, 166
holdfasts in, 126
Lessonia nigrescens, 47
Macrocystis ‘integrifolia,’ 226
marine protected areas (MPAs), 269
recreational/sport fishing, 249
Chiloé Island, Chile, 114, 118
China, 235, 236, 240, 247
aquaculture in, 246
Chondracanthus corymbiferus, 106(f ), 109
Christchurch, 75(f ), 76, 122
Chromaveolata, 4
Chromis punctiipinnis, 59, 108
Circeis spirillum, 194
clades, 4, 5(f )
Clean Water Act, 220
climate change variables, 286–90, 287(f ), 288(f )
closed population, larval replenishment model,
270, 271(f )
Clupea pallasi, 236
Codium sp., 124
Codium vermilara, 120
commercial fishing, 251–56
in Australia, 256
California kelp-associated fisheries, 252–55,
253(f ), 254(f )
in Chilean kelp forests, 255
in New Zealand, 256
communities, 101
alternative stable states, 101
boulders, 125–27
Central California to Southeast Alaska,
109–14
community-level cascades, 198
composite, 102–4
crevices, 125–27
detached communities, 141–48, 142(f )
grazing in, 177–95
habitats, 125–29, 128(f )
holdfasts, 125–27
Northern Pacific Baja California to Southern
California, 104–9
Northern Peru to West Coast of Southern
Chile, 114–18
patches, 129–30, 129(f )
phase shifts, 101, 189–90, 189(f ), 198

INDEX

•

385

communities (continued)
southern hemisphere provinces, 120–23
Southern Ocean, 123–25
species-level cascade, 198
temporal variation, 130–39
trophic cascades, 197–98, 213(f )
variation by biogeographic province, 104–25
West Coast of Southern Chile–Southeast
Argentina, 118–20
community ecology, 20, 305
community-level cascades, 198
competitive interaction, 167–75, 168(f ), 169(f ),
173(f )
in microscopic stages, 171–72
recruitment, 169
on understory seaweeds, 172–73
Concholepas concholepas, 115(f ), 117, 255
Connectivity, 22, 71–72, 78, 81, 87, 94, 96, 98.
213(f ), 269, 271, 285, 311, 314
control webs, 152–61, 160(f )
Cookia sulcata, 116(f ), 123
Corallina officinalis, 120
Corynactis californica, 108, 112, 167, 174
Coryphopterus nicholsii, 108
Cosmasterias lurida, 115(f ), 119
Costaria costata, 107(f ), 113
cowcod, 250, 275
crabs, 126, 193, 201, 209, 212
Crepipatella fecunda, 118, 166
crevices, 125–27
crude oil spill, 224
Cryptopleura farlowiana, 111
Cryptopleura violacea, 170
currents, 13(f ), 14, 61–62, 62(f )
Cymadusa uncinata, 193
Cystophora spp., 116(f ), 121
Dayton, Paul, 22, 74, 310
DCPP. See Diablo Canyon Power Plant
Del Mar, 72, 108–9
demography, 72–78
density-vague regulation model, 77–78
desalination plants, 221–23, 222(f )
Desmarestia ligulata, 111–13, 135, 166, 169, 170,
232
Desmarestia rossii, 117(f ), 124
detached communities, 141–48
beaches, 142(f ), 144–46

386

•

INDEX

rafts, 142–44, 142(f )
subtidal soft benthos, 142(f ), 147–48
detritus, 141–42, 142(f )
Diablo Canyon Power Plant (DCPP), 221–23,
261, 291
diatoms, 4, 15, 166–67
dichotomy, 25
Dictyota spp., 107
diesel oil spill, 224
diffusion, 58, 68
DIN. See dissolved inorganic nitrogen
Diopatra ornata, 106(f ), 109, 112, 147
dispersal among patches (in southern California), 80(f )
dispersal mechanisms, 87–90
Disporella buski, 194
dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN), 56–57
dissolved organic matter (DOM), 149
distribution, 11–16, 13(f )
DOM. See dissolved organic matter
drifters, 81–82, 82(f )
Durvillaea antarctica, 16, 97, 117(f ), 124–25, 144
Durvillaea willana, 124
East Australian Current (EAC), 186, 205, 233
echinoderms, 134(f ), 185
Ecklonia, 50, 53
Ecklonia maxima, 120
Ecklonia radiata, 116(f ), 121, 184, 219, 230
ecological factors, 83
ecomorphs, 6, 7(f ), 65, 114
Ectocarpus siliculosus, 7
eddies, 14, 87, 89
eelgrass epiphytes, 209
Egregia menziesii, 105(f ), 106(f ), 63, 108–10, 192
Egretta thula, 111
Eisenia arborea, 53, 74, 105(f ), 107, 109, 111, 119,
129(f ), 133, 137, 174, 228
Eisenia galapagensis, 50
Elachista nigra, 228
Elasmopus rapax, 233
Elkhorn Slough, 209
elk kelp (Pelagophycus porra), 102
El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO), 26, 42,
45, 61, 91, 132–37, 191, 212, 218, 229, 234,
245, 259, 275, 286
elongation, 26
and temperature, 47, 48(f )

Embioticidae, 249
Embiotoca jacksoni, 173
Enhydra lutris, 102, 106(f ), 107, 110, 112, 118,
200, 206, 212, 241
ENSO. See El Niño/Southern Oscillation
Epymenia falklandica, 115(f ), 119
eukaryotic protists, 6
Evechinus chloroticus, 116(f ), 123, 191
evolution, 6–11, 7(f ), 8(f ), 18(f )
abiotic environment, 11
facilitative interaction, 163–67, 165(f )
abalone, 166
fish predation, 164, 200–202
lobster predation, 202–5, 206(f )
noncalcified red algal, 166
nongeniculate coralline algae, 166
recruitment of juvenile fishes, 164
Falkland Current, 118
Falkland Islands, 118, 142
Fauchea laciniata, 170
fecundity, 32, 83
female gametophytes, 34, 35(f ), 36
fertilization, 36–37, 37(f )
fish assemblages, 274
Fishery and Aquaculture Law of 1991, 255
fish–habitat associations, 127–29, 128(f )
fish predation, 164
on grazers, 200–202
flimmer flagellum, 33
foliar standing crop (FSC), 149
food webs, 152–61, 154(f ), 155(f )
frondose red algae, 117
fronds, 24–25. See also vegetative fronds
biogeographic variation, 27
growth rates, 164, 165(f )
size, 27
FSC. See foliar standing crop
fucoids (order Fucales), 72
vs. kelps, 72, 73(f )
life cycle, 73(f )
life history, 73(f )
fucoxanthin, 3
Fucus pyriferus, 4
future research, 313–16
Gaimardia sp., 212
Gaimardia trapesina, 119, 124, 144

gametophytes, 5, 34–37, 36, 52
abiotic requirements, 38, 38(t)
female, 34, 35(f ), 36
male, 36
Gelidium robustum, 173
genetic structure of populations, 93–98, 97(f )
giant bladder kelp, 3
Gigartina skottsbergii, 115(f ), 119
Girella laevifrons, 118
Girella nigricans, 194, 261
global change, 285–301, 300(f )
climate change variables and predicted trends,
286–90, 287(f ), 288(f )
effects of climate change on non-algal species,
297–301
nutrients, 294–95
ocean acidification (OA), 295–97
temperature, 291–94, 293(f )
wave forces, 294–95
Glossophora kunthii, 117
Godley Head, 122
gorgonian corals, 49
Graus nigra, 251, 255
grazing, 177–95
fish predation, 200–202
invertebrates in California forests,
179(t)–80(t)
kelp–sea urchin interactions, 181–85, 182(f )
lobster predation, 202–5, 206(f )
Point Loma kelp forest, 184
reversion of barrens to kelp habitat, 188–90,
189(f )
sea otters predation, 206–12
urchins rampage, 185–88, 187(f )
The Great Tide pool, 113
green algae (Chlorophyta), 3, 6, 7, 297
greenling, 249
growth rates, 23
Gulf of Guayaquil, 114
Habitat Production Foregone model, 222–23
habitats, 125–29, 128(f )
fishes, 127–29, 128(f )
preservation, 312
Haliotis corrugata, 107, 254
Haliotis cracherodii, 254, 277
Haliotis discus hannai, 239
Haliotis fulgens, 107

INDEX

•

387

Haliotis iris, 116(f ), 123, 192, 239, 256
Haliotis kamtschatkana, 107(f ), 113
Haliotis laevigata, 256
Haliotis rubra, 116(f ), 121, 256, 280
Haliotis rufescens, 207, 211, 238–39, 246–47, 251,
253, 255, 261, 277
Haliotis sorenseni, 254–55
Haliotis virginea, 125
Halopteris funicularis, 125
haptera, 25–26, 29–30, 126–27, 143, 193
Harpagifer georgianus, 124
harvesting, 225–27
in California, 225–26, 239(f )
in Chile, 226–27
Macrocystis ‘integrifolia,’ 226–27
in New Zealand, 227, 238(f )
sport fishing, 248–51
vessel, 241(f )
Hawaii, 247
Heliocidaris erythrogramma, 116(f ), 121, 184, 191,
280
The Hemidome, 243
Hercules Powder Company, 240
herring, 227, 236
heterokont, 33
Heterokontophyta, 4
Heterostichus rostratus, 164
Hexagrammos spp., 111, 249
Hippothoa hyalina, 194
holdfasts, 21, 25–26, 43, 56, 64, 104, 113, 119,
125–27, 142–43, 163–64, 169, 169(f ), 178,
179(t), 182, 184, 190, 193, 231, 233
in Argentina, 193
morphology, 7(f )
Homarus americanus, 178, 198
Hooker, Joseph Dalton, 17, 22(f )
Hopkins Marine Life Refuge, 277
huiro, 3
human usage, 235–63
aquaculture, 246–47
artificial reefs, 261–63
biofuel sequestration, 241–45
carbon sequestration, 241–45
chemicals, 240–41
commercial fishing, 251–56
courses in California, 258–59
fertilizer, 235–40

388

•

INDEX

food, 235–40, 237(t)
mitigation, 259–61
new forests creation, 259–61
recreational use, 248
restoration of kelp forests, 259–61
hydrocorals. See Stylaster californicus
Hydrodamalis gigas, 10, 177
Hydroides elegans, 233
Hymenena falklandica, 120
hypotheses, 10–11
Hypsypops rubicundus, 182(f )
impingement forces, 63–67
inbreeding, 93, 247
industrial waste discharge, 218–20
inertial forces, 63–67
inorganic nitrogen concentrations, 56–59, 146,
231
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), 286
International Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN), 267, 268
introduced species, 227–34
animals, 232–34
in California, 228
macroalgae, 227–32
invasions, invasive, 121, 133, 227–28, 308
invasive species, 227–34, 228(f )
iodine, 30–31
IPCC. See Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change
Ireland, 236
Isla de Los Estados, 118
Islas Diego Ramírez, 118
Islas Lobos de Tierra, Peru, 114
Islas San Benito, 107
isopods, 126–27, 143, 164, 178, 193
IUCN. See International Union for Conservation
of Nature
Jackson Head, 121–22, 122(f )
Japan, 9, 207, 235, 239
aquaculture in, 246
Jasus edwardsii, 116(f ), 121, 188, 206(f ), 256, 260,
280, 292
Julescraneia grandicornis, 9, 9(f )
juvenile sporophytes, 20, 25, 53, 55(f ), 166, 218

Kaipiti Island, New Zealand, 277
Kelco, 241, 259
Kelletia kelletii, 108, 212
Kelp Habitat Improvement Project, 259
kelp–sea urchin interactions, 181–85, 182(f )
Kelstar, harvesting vessel, 241(f )
Kerguelen Islands, 124
Kingdom Chromista, 4–5
Kodiak Island, 12, 109
Korea
aquaculture in, 246
Lacuna unifasciata, 192
Laminaria abyssalis, 50
Laminaria brasiliensis, 50
Laminariaceae, 4–5
Laminaria farlowii, 5(f ), 74, 105(f ), 108–10,
129(f )
Laminariales, 4–5, 5(f ), 8, 11, 20, 30–31, 32(f ), 33,
35(f )
Laminaria longicruris, 199
Laminaria setchellii, 106(f ), 110, 112, 136, 292
Laminaria solidungula, 59
Laminaria spp., 53, 237(t)
Landsburgia quercifolia, 116(f ), 122
Larus dominicanus, 212
Larus dominicus, 115(f ), 119
Larus occidentalis, 111
larval replenishment models, 271–72, 271(f )
closed population, 270, 271(f )
limited distance, 271(f )
multiple source, 271(f )
single source, 270, 271(f )
Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), 15, 97
LDD. See long-distance dispersal
Leptopecten latiauratus, 119
Lessonia brevifolia, 125
Lessonia flavicans, 115(f ), 119, 170
Lessonia nigrescens, 47, 115(f ), 117, 136
Lessonia sp., 120
Lessonia trabeculata, 115(f ), 117, 129
Leuresthes tenuis, 146
LGM. See Last Glacial Maximum
Lichenopora buskiana, 194
life history and development, 7(f ), 24(f )
light environment, 49–55, 54(f ), 55(f )
Limbaugh, Conrad, 21, 22(f ), 184

limited distance, larval replenishment model,
271(f )
Limnoria algarum, 193
lingcod, 128(f ), 249
Lithothamnion glaciale, 297
lobsters, 109, 181, 200, 279(f )
effects, 206(f )
predation on grazers, 202–5, 206(f )
rock, 188
spiny, 200, 252, 253(f )
loco, 255
long-distance dispersal (LDD), 269
Lontra felina, 115(f ), 118
Lophogorgia chilensis, 105(f ), 108
Los Angeles, 44, 64, 205, 259
Loxechinus albus, 115(f ), 118–19, 135(f ), 137, 183,
191
Lytechinus pictus, 108, 133, 138, 168, 190
Lyttelton, 76
Macrocystis ‘angustifolia,’ 6, 7(f ), 120
Macrocystis ‘integrifolia,’ 6, 7(f ), 67, 106(f ),
107(f ), 110, 113–14, 129, 136–37, 148, 226,
246–47
Macrocystis ‘laevis,’ 6, 7(f ), 50, 117(f ), 124
male gametophytes, 36
Management and Exploitation Areas for Benthic
Resources (MEABR), 255
Maria Island, 278, 280
Marine Life Protection Act, 1999, 268
marine protected areas (MPAs), 206(f ), 217, 233,
252, 260, 263, 265–82
in Australia, 269
in California, 268–69
in Chile, 269
definitions, 267–69
design, 269–73
effects on fish and fisheries, 274–77, 276(f )
effects on species and communities, 277–81
future, 281–82
implementation, 269–73
in New Zealand, 268
objectives, 268–69
purposes, 268–69
types, 268–69
marine recreation, 248
Marine Reserves Act (1971), New Zealand, 268

INDEX

•

389

Marion Island, 117(f ), 124
mauri, 256
Maynea californica, 147
MEABR. See Management and Exploitation
Areas for Benthic Resources
Medialuna ancietae, 251, 255
Medialuna californiensis, 144(f ), 194, 261
Megalorchestia corniculata, 146
Megastraea undosa, 105(f ), 106(f ), 107, 194
Megathura crenulata, 192
meiospores, 31
Membranipora, 60
Membranipora membranacea, 127, 194
meristematic epidermis, 25
meristoderm. See meristematic epidermis
Merluccius productus, 147
mesograzers, 164, 202
metapopulations, 71, 78–81
Meuschenia freycineti, 116(f ), 121
Meuschenia scaber, 123
Mexico, 3, 12, 42, 46–47, 57, 78, 91, 96, 102, 126,
178, 185, 190, 192, 207, 224, 229, 240, 247,
255, 291, 294, 299
microscopic stages, 85(f ), 86
mitigation, 261–62
Monterey Bay, California, 126
Monterey Bay Aquarium, 248(f ), 257, 257(f )
Monterey Submarine Canyon, 147
Montrose Chemical Corporation, 259
MPA. See marine protected areas
mucilage ducts, 29–30
multiple source, larval replenishment model,
271(f )
Muricea californica, 44
mysids, 157
Namibia, 120
Naples Reef (Santa Barbara, California), 80(f ),
108, 136, 166, 189
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System, 220
natural capital, 305
Natural Energy Laboratory of Hawaii Authority,
247
Nereocystis, 4, 9
Nereocystis luetkeana, 5(f ), 49, 65–66, 110, 223,
226, 292
net primary production (NPP), 149, 150(t), 151

390

•

INDEX

Neushul, Michael, 11, 19, 22(f )
new kelp forests creation, 259–61
New Zealand, 11, 16, 19, 27, 43, 60, 68, 76, 96,
116(f ), 120–23, 191–92, 202, 227, 230
commercial fishing, 256
Kelp harvesting, 238(f )
marine protected areas (MPAs), 268
MPAs, 266
New Zealand Fisheries Quota Management
System, 227
New Zealand Maori, 256
nitrate, 56–58
temperature relationship, 45, 46(f ), 56–57
nitrite, 56
nitrogen acquisition, 56–59, 60
NOAA. See United States National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
noncalcified red algae, 166
non-float-bearing kelps, 10
nongeniculate coralline algae, 117, 121, 166
Norrisia norrisi, 192
North, Wheeler J., 21, 22(f )
North America, 11, 14, 45, 65, 170, 177–78, 183,
191, 199, 207, 212, 249, 267, 291, 304
North Island, New Zealand, 121–23
North Pacific region, 9–10
Notolabrus celidotus, 202
Notolabrus fucicola, 202
Notolabrus spp., 123
Notothenia coriiceps, 117(f ), 124
Notothenia magellanica, 119
Nova Scotia, 178, 185, 188, 199
NPP. See net primary production
nutrient requirements, 39(t), 55–60
OA. See ocean acidification
occurrence, 11–12, 13(f ), 14–15
ocean acidification (OA), 295–97
effects on algae, 296–97
Ochrophyta, 4–5
octopi, 212
Odax pullus, 116(f ), 123
once-through cooling system, 221, 222(f )
Oncorhynchus mykiss, 238
Ophiodon elongates, 249
Ophioplocus sp., 120
Ophiothrix spiculata, 138
opossum shrimp, 157

Oregon, 113, 185
Otago, 76
Otaria byronia, 120
Otaria flavescens, 118
Oxyjulis californica, 108, 164, 182(f ), 194, 202
Pachythyone rubra, 275
paddies. See rafts
Padina spp., 107
Palos Verdes, 44(f ), 218, 219(f ), 259
Palos Verdes Peninsula, 64
Panulirus interruptus, 105(f ), 106(f ), 107, 200,
203–4, 249, 252, 253(f ), 278, 279(f )
PAR. See Pendleton Artificial Reef; photosynthetically active radiation
Paracentrotus lividus, 199
Paracerceis cordata, 193
Paralabrax clathratus, 108, 164, 230
Paralabrax maculatofaciatus, 107
Paranotothenia angustata, 125
Paranotothenia microcepidota, 125
Parapercis colias, 123
Parastichopus californicus, 107(f ), 113
particulate organic carbon (POC), 147, 156
particulate organic matter (POM), 149, 156
particulate organic nitrogen (PON), 156
Patagonotothen spp., 119
patches, 129–30, 129(f )
dynamics, 71–72, 78–79
extinction, 79–80, 79(f )
within forests, 131–32
isolation, 79(f )
recolonization, 79, 79(f )
size, 79(f )
Patiria miniata, 105(f ), 106(f ), 108, 112, 133,
168(f ), 191
paua, 239
pejeperro, 255
Pelagophycus porra, 4, 5(f ), 9, 102, 105(f ), 108, 171
Pendleton Artificial Reef (PAR), 261
Pentidotea resecata, 193
Pentidothea resecta, 202
P-E/P-I curves, 51, 51(f )
Peramphithoe femorata, 193, 202
Perna canaliculus, 116(f ), 122–23
Peru, 114
Phaeophyceae, 4, 5
Phalacrocorax pennicillatus, 111

Phalocrocorax atriceps, 124
phase shifts, communities, 101, 189–90, 189(f ),
198
pheromone, 36, 37(f ), 172
Philippines, 281
Phoca vitulina, 111
photon flux density, 49–50
photosynthesis, 11, 20, 33, 39, 50, 52, 55, 58, 67,
149, 296, 297
photosynthetically active radiation (PAR), 49–50
Phycodrys setchellii, 111
Phycolimnoria sp., 120
Phyllopteryx taeniolatus, 121
Phyllospadix torreyi, 106(f ), 108–9
Phyllospora comosa, 116(f ), 121
phytoplankton, 45, 49, 53, 149, 152, 156, 218, 311
pink abalone, 254
Pisaster giganteus, 106(f ), 109
Pisaster spp., 112
planktonic spores, 32(f ), 33–34
plantae, 3
Pleurophycus gardneri, 111
Plocamium cartilagineum, 106(f ), 170
Pluvialis squatarola, 146
pneumatocysts, 25
POC. See particulate organic carbon
Point Arguello, 78
Point Conception, 49, 104, 109–10
Point Loma kelp forest, 50, 64, 105(f ), 107–8,
127, 129(f ), 184, 200, 203, 205, 218, 219(f ),
259, 272
Point Santa Cruz, 170, 209
Pollux, 265
Polyneura latissima, 111, 170
polysaccharide, 19, 26, 30, 59, 240
POM. See particulate organic matter
PON. See particulate organic nitrogen
porra, 5(f ), 17
Postelsia palmaeformis, 4, 5(f )
potash, 19
potash fertilizer, 240
predation
fish on grazers, 200–202
lobster on grazers, 202–5, 206(f )
sea otters on grazers, 206–12
predators, 198, 213(f )
Gaimardia sp., 212
Kelletia kelletii, 212

INDEX

•

3 91

predators (continued)
Larus dominicanus, 212
octopi, 212
Pycnopodia helianthoides, 212
primary consumers, 146, 149, 177
primary producers, 153, 177
Prince Edward Islands, 10, 50, 124
Pritchett, R. T., 17
produced-waters, 219
productivity, 15–16, 19, 45, 51, 102, 138, 141, 148–52,
211, 214, 240, 242, 245, 247, 251, 306
biomass, 149
net primary production (NPP), 149, 150(t), 151
phytoplankton, 149, 152
understory algae, 152
prokaryotic cyanobacteria, 6
propagules sources, 81–84
Pseudoechinus magellanicus, 191
Pseudoechinus marionis, 117(f ), 124
Pterocladiella capillacea, 174
Pterygophora californica, 53, 74, 105(f ), 106(f ),
107(f ), 108, 110, 112–13, 129, 129(f ), 133,
134(f ), 135–36, 168–69, 168(f ), 191, 261,
291–92
Puerto Deseado, 119–20
Puerto Toro, 118, 170
Pugettia producta, 193
Punta San Hipólito, 104
Pycnopodia helianthoides, 112, 212
Pyura chilensis, 115(f ), 117
Pyura pachydermatina, 116(f ), 122
QAM. See quarter acre module
quarter acre module (QAM), 243, 244(f )
rafts, 142–44, 142(f ), 144(f )
RCPs. See Representative Concentration
Pathways
recreational fishery. See sport fishing
recruitment, 26, 34, 36–37, 40–43, 45, 53, 57, 61,
67, 74, 76–81, 90–91, 96, 118, 126, 132,
135–39, 143, 151, 157–59, 163, 166, 169, 174,
182, 185–87, 190, 203, 214, 219, 221, 226,
230, 254, 260, 271(f ), 275, 280, 292
juvenile fishes, 164
recruitment windows, 84–87, 86(f )
red abalone, 211, 238, 246, 253–54, 277
red algae (Rhodophyta), 3

392

•

INDEX

Reed, Dan, 22, 78
Regional Oceanic Modeling System (ROMS)
model, 94
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs),
287
reproductive output, 81–84
research pioneers, 22(f )
rheotaxis, 89
Rhodymenia californica, 109
Rhodymenia, 105(f ), 108
Rio Colorado, 118
Rio de Plata, 118
Robe, South Australia, 120–21
rockfish, 109–11, 113, 153, 164, 249, 250, 252,
274–75
runoff, 31, 53, 56, 59–60, 217–18, 220–21, 224,
263, 285, 311–12
Saccharina groenlandica, 107(f ), 113
Saccharina japonica, 246
Sand Hill Bluff (Santa Cruz), 111–12
San Diego, 22, 43–44, 47, 50, 64, 74, 78, 107–8,
127, 133, 134(f ), 137, 158, 171, 184, 193, 205,
218, 240, 241(f ), 259, 262, 272
San Francisco, 193, 208, 254, 275
San Miguel Island, 43, 211
San Nicholas Island, 110, 186, 187(f ), 200, 211,
275, 276(f )
San Onofre, 134(f )
San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station
(SONGS), 221–23, 261
Santa Barbara, 22, 25–26, 28(f ), 43, 64–65,
66(f ), 83, 95–96, 95(f ), 108, 127, 128(f ), 131,
136, 139, 146, 148–50, 153, 156, 159, 189,
204, 224, 225(f ), 259, 278, 313
Santa Barbara oil spill, 224, 225(f )
Santa Catalina Island, 109, 202
Santa Cruz, California, 65, 111–12, 114, 168, 170,
173, 188, 209
Santa Monica Bay, 275
Sarcothalia crispata, 118
Sargasso gigante, 3
Sargassum horneri, 228, 228(f )
Sargassum muticum, 133, 228–29, 228(f ), 231
schizogamy, 29(f ), 30
Schizoseris sp., 116(f ), 124
scimitar blade, 25
Scorpaenichthys marmoratus, 249

Scripps Submarine Canyon, 147
scuba, 21
sea otters, 10, 21, 65, 102, 106(f ), 107, 110, 112,
114, 151, 163, 193, 200, 203, 241, 245, 248,
254, 256, 275, 308. See also Enhydra lutris
in California, 208–11, 208(f )
features, 210
metabolic rate, 210
predation on grazers, 206–12
sea-surface temperature (SST), 46, 66(f )
sea urchins, 10, 21, 61, 65, 74, 103(f ), 105(f ),
106(f ), 107(f ), 107–14, 115(f ), 116(f ), 117(f ),
118–21, 126–27, 129–33, 135(f ), 136–41,
142(f ), 144, 147, 151, 155–56, 158–59, 163,
166, 174, 178, 187(f ), 189(f ), 190–94,
197–204, 206(f ), 207, 209, 212, 214, 218,
219(f ), 224, 230, 233, 243, 245, 247, 252,
259, 260, 275, 277–78, 280, 292, 298, 301,
304
grazing, 181–85, 182(f )
Seaweed Flour, 238
seaweeds, 3, 242. See also fucoids (order
Fucales)
advantages, 242
biofuel, 241–45
carbon sequestration, 241–45
disadvantages, 242
distribution, 12
evaluation, 61
as fertilizer, 239–40
as food, 236
Sebastes gilli, 250
Sebastes levis, 250, 275
Sebastes paucispinus, 249, 275
Sebastes pinniger, 250
Sebastes ruberrimus, 250
Sebastes spp., 110, 249, 274–75
secondary consumers, 153, 155, 177
sedimentation, 43–45, 52, 74, 140, 166, 205, 217,
221, 230, 259, 304
seed banks, 52, 90–93, 306
self-fertilization cost, 93
Semicossyphus darwini, 251, 255
Semicossyphus maculatus (Chilean sheephead),
118
Semicossyphus pulcher, 107–8, 200, 249, 252,
253(f ), 275, 276(f )
Seriola lalandi, 143

sewage discharge, 21, 130, 133, 137, 218–20, 259,
304
sexual reproduction, 31, 34, 35(f ), 36
sheephead, 107–10, 200–201, 203, 249, 275,
276(f )
sieve elements, 29(f ), 30
sieve tubes, 30
single source, larval replenishment model, 270,
271(f )
Skottsberg, Carl, 17, 20, 22(f )
Snares Islands, New Zealand, 121–23
SONGS. See San Onofre Nuclear Generating
Station
sori, 31
source-sink transport, 30
South Africa, 11, 49, 50, 120, 123, 131, 294, 299
South America, 11, 14, 114, 144, 183
South Central Chile, 115(f ), 117
southern hemisphere provinces, 120–23
Southern Ocean, 123–25
South Island, New Zealand, 121–23
spawn on kelp, 236
species-level cascades, 198
spillover effect, fishing, 266
spiny lobster, 107, 110, 200, 203–4, 249, 252
Spirorbis spirillum, 194
sporangia, 31, 32(f )
spore dispersal, 81, 84–87, 88(f )
spores, 31–34, 32(f ), 38, 38(t)
abiotic requirements, 38, 38(t)
planktonic, 32(f ), 33
swimming speeds, 33
sporophylls, 31, 32(f )
sporophytes, 24–31, 29(f )
abiotic requirements, 38, 38(t)
development, 24–27
growth, 24–27
internal anatomy, 27–31, 29(f )
recruitment windows, 84–86, 86(f )
sporophytes (diploid), 5
sport fishing, 21, 248–51, 250(f )
SST. See sea-surface temperature
Stephanocystis dioica, 174
Stephanocystis osmundacea, 105(f ), 106(f ), 108,
110, 129(f ), 170
Stewart Island, New Zealand, 121–23
Stillwater Cove, 106(f ), 110–11, 168–69, 169(f ),
170, 191

INDEX

•

3 93

stochastic population model, 77
Stramenopila, 4
string kelp, 3
Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis, 113, 178, 185,
198, 207, 298
Strongylocentrotus franciscanus, 107, 113, 132, 138,
147, 166, 182(f ), 184, 188, 193, 200, 203–4,
247, 252, 253(f ), 260, 277
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, 107, 132, 166,
184–85, 203–4, 247, 252–53, 253(f ), 260,
277
Strongylocentrotus spp., 105(f ), 106(f ), 107(f ),
108, 113, 132, 134(f ), 136–38, 147, 166, 178,
184–85, 188, 193, 198, 200, 203, 207, 247,
252, 253(f ), 260, 298
Styela montereyensis, 108
Stylaster californicus, 44
Subantarctic Islands, 11–12, 16, 22, 42, 123–24,
295
subsidies, 142
substratum, 43–45
subtidal soft benthos, 142(f ), 147–48
surfperch (Embioticidae), 109, 111, 128(f ), 136,
164, 173, 249
survivorship curves, 74, 75(f ), 76
symplastic process, 30
synthetic oceanographic and ecophysiological
model, 50
Taiwan, 257
Taliepus nuttalli, 193
Tampico spill, 224–25
Tasmania, 11, 96, 116(f ), 120–21, 130–31, 182,
184–90, 192–93, 205, 233, 256
taxonomic classification, 3–6
Tegula atra, 118
Tegula brunnea, 192
Tegula montereyi, 192
Tegula pulligo, 192
Tegula spp., 111
Tegula tridentata, 117
temperature, 45–49
and elongation, 47, 48(f )
nitrate relationship, 45, 46(f ), 56–57
temporal variation (communities), 130–39,
134(f ), 135(f )
diversity, 139–40
El Niños effects, 132–37

394

•

INDEX

long-term persistence, 137–39
patches within forests, 131–32
territorial user rights for fisheries (TURFS),
255
tertiary consumers, 177
Tetrapygus niger, 115(f ), 117, 135(f ), 137, 183
Thematic Mapper (TM), 131
thigmotaxis, 89
Tierra del Fuego, 202, 212
Tinderbox, 280
TM. See Thematic Mapper
top-down control, 151, 157, 197
topography, 126
toxic spills, 224–25, 225(f )
traffic, 224–25
Tristan da Cunha–Gough Islands groups, 120
Trochus viridis, 116(f ), 123
trophic cascades, 197, 198, 213(f ), 214
trumpet hyphae, 30
turbulence, 68, 89, 222(f )
TURFS. See territorial user rights for fisheries
UAV. See unmanned aerial vehicles
Ulva spp., 107(f ), 113
Undaria pinnatifida, 90–91, 121, 174, 228, 228(f ),
230–33, 246
United States, 220, 240
United States Executive Order 13158, 268
United States Endangered Species Act, 255
United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), 259
United States Postal Service© kelp forest stamp
set, 258(f )
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), 131
urchin grazing, 21, 110, 131, 140, 167, 174, 181,
213, 218, 259, 260
urchins rampage, 185–88
Valẽre Kelp Pepper, 236
Vancouver Island, British Columbia, 113–14, 209,
308
vegetative biomass, 32, 83. See also biomass
vegetative fronds, 25–26, 31, 83
vieja negra, 251, 255
Voyage of the Beagle, 17
Walkerville, Victoria, 121
Washington, D.C., 113, 209

water motion, 11, 26, 32, 42, 45, 51, 58, 60–63,
62(f ), 63(f ), 64, 71, 90, 113, 124, 142,
147–48, 155–56, 167, 177, 183, 190, 193, 226,
246, 307
and boundary layer effects, 67–68
Watersipora spp., 233
Western Boundary Currents, 294
Wheeler North Reef (WNR), California, 262–63,
262(f )
white abalone, 125, 254–55
withering syndrome, 254–55

wrack, 142(f ), 144–46
wrack biomass, 146
Xiphophora chondrophylla, 125
yellow rockfish, 250
Zelp, 238, 238(f )
Zonaria sp., 120
zooplankton, 103(f ), 156–57, 298
zoospores, 24(f ), 31, 83–84, 219, 225

INDEX

•

395

